CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PRE-PACKAGED FOODS CXS 1-1985 CXS 1-1985 ADOPTED 1985 AMENDED 2026 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 20 -- History of the standard 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, this standard was revised to update Sections 4.2.2, 4.3.4, and 4.7.1(vii), and Section 8.1.3.1. In addition, an annex on the guidelines on the use of precautionary allergen labelling was added. This publication was reformatted and published in 2026. 2024 Revisions Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2024, this standard was revised to address food allergen labelling through changes/additions to Section 2: “Definition of terms”, Section 6: “Exemptions from mandatory labelling requirements”, Section 8: “Presentation of mandatory information”, and Sections 4.2.1.3, 4.2.1.4, 4.2.3, 4.2.3.1 and 4.2.4.2. Amendments and revisions made prior to 2024: Amended in 1991, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2008 and 2010. Revised in 2018. Adopted in 1985. -- 2 of 20 -- 1 GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PRE PACKAGED FOODS (CXS 1-1985) 1 Scope This standard applies to the labelling of all pre-packaged foods to be offered as such to the consumer or for catering purposes and to certain aspects relating to the presentation thereof. 2 Definition of terms For the purpose of this standard: Allergenic food means a food (including ingredients, food additives and processing aids) that can elicit immunoglobulin class E (IgE)-mediated or other specific immune-mediated reactions in susceptible individuals. Claim means any representation which states, suggests or implies that a food has particular qualities relating to its origin, nutritional properties, nature, processing, composition or any other quality. Coeliac disease means a chronic immune-mediated intestinal disease in genetically predisposed individuals induced by exposure to dietary gluten proteins that come from wheat, rye, barley and triticale (a cross between wheat and rye). Consumer means persons and families purchasing and receiving food in order to meet their personal needs. Container means any packaging of food for delivery as a single item, whether by completely or partially enclosing the food and includes wrappers. A container may enclose several units or types of packages when such is offered to the consumer. For use in date marking of pre-packaged food: Best-before date or best quality-before date means the date which signifies the end of the period, under any stated storage conditions, during which the unopened product will remain fully marketable and will retain any specific qualities for which implied or express claims have been made. However, beyond the date the food may still be acceptable for consumption. Date of manufacture means the date on which the food becomes the product as described. This is not an indication of the durability of the product. Date of packaging means the date on which the food is placed in the immediate container in which it will be ultimately sold. This is not an indication of the durability of the product. Use-by date or expiration date means the date which signifies the end of the period under any stated storage conditions, after which the product should not be sold or consumed due to safety and quality reasons. Food means any substance, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, which is intended for human consumption, and includes drinks, chewing gum and any substance which has been used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of food but does not include cosmetics or tobacco or substances used only as drugs. Food additive means any substance not normally consumed as a food by itself and not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, whether or not it has nutritive value. The intentional addition of which to food for a technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food results, or may be reasonably expected to result, (directly or indirectly) in it or its by-products becoming a component of, or otherwise affecting the characteristics of such foods. The term does not include “contaminants” or substances added to food for maintaining or improving nutritional qualities. -- 3 of 20 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD Food allergen means the substance in an allergenic food, usually a protein or protein derivative that can elicit IgE-mediated or other specific immune-mediated reactions in susceptible individuals. Food allergy means a reproducible adverse health effect arising from an IgE antibody or non-IgE antibody immune-mediated response following oral exposure to a food. Foods for catering purposes means those foods for use in restaurants, canteens, schools, hospitals and similar institutions where food is offered for immediate consumption. Ingredient means any substance, including a food additive, used in the manufacture or preparation of a food and present in the final product although possibly in a modified form. Label means any tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other descriptive matter, written, printed, stencilled, marked, embossed or impressed on, or attached to, a container of food. Labelling includes any written, printed or graphic matter that is present on the label, accompanies the food, or is displayed near the food, including that for the purpose of promoting its sale or disposal. Lot means a definitive quantity of a commodity produced essentially under the same conditions. Pre-packaged means packaged or made up in advance in a container, ready for offer to the consumer, or for catering purposes. Processing aid means a substance or material, not including apparatus or utensils, and not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing of raw materials, foods or its ingredients, to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or processing and which may result in the non- intentional but unavoidable presence of residues or derivatives in the final product. 3 General principles 3.1 Pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling in a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding its character in any respect.i 3.2 Pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling by words, pictorial or other devices which refer to or are suggestive either directly or indirectly, of any other product with which such food might be confused, or in such a manner as to lead the purchaser or consumer to suppose that the food is connected with such other product. 4 Mandatory labelling of pre-packaged foods The following information shall appear on the label of pre-packaged foods as applicable to the food being labelled, except to the extent otherwise expressly provided in an individual Codex standard: 4.1 Name of the food 4.1.1 The name shall indicate the true nature of the food and normally be specific and not generic: 4.1.1.1 Where a name or names have been established for a food in a Codex standard, at least one of these names shall be used. i Examples of descriptions or presentations to which these general principles refer are given in the General guidelines on claims (CXG 1-1979). -- 4 of 20 -- 3 GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PRE PACKAGED FOODS (CXS 1-1985) 4.1.1.2 In other cases, the name prescribed by national legislation shall be used. 4.1.1.3 In the absence of any such name, either a common or usual name existing by common usage as an appropriate descriptive term which was not misleading or confusing to the consumer shall be used. 4.1.1.4 A “coined”, “fanciful”, “brand” name or “trade mark” may be used provided it accompanie