CXC 58-2005 Page 1 of 51 Adopted in 2005. Editorial amendments: 2013. CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR MEAT1 CXC 58-2005 1. INTRODUCTION 3 2. SCOPE AND USE OF THIS CODE 3 3. DEFINITIONS 4 4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MEAT HYGIENE 8 5. PRIMARY PRODUCTION 9 5.1 Principles of meat hygiene applying to primary production 9 5.2 Hygiene of slaughter animals 9 5.3 Hygiene of killed wild game 11 5.4 Hygiene of feed and feed ingredients 12 5.5 Hygiene of the primary production environment 12 5.6 Transport 13 5.6.1 Transport of slaughter animals 13 5.6.2 Transport of killed wild game 13 6. PRESENTATION OF ANIMALS FOR SLAUGHTER 13 6.1 Principles of meat hygiene applying to animals presented for slaughter 14 6.2 Conditions of lairage 14 6.3 Ante-mortem inspection 15 6.3.1 Design of ante-mortem inspection systems 15 6.3.2 Implementation of ante-mortem inspection 16 6.3.3 Ante-mortem judgement categories 17 6.4 Information on animals presented for slaughter 17 7. PRESENTATION OF KILLED WILD GAME FOR DRESSING 18 7.1 Principles of meat hygiene applying to inspection of killed wild game presented for dressing 18 7.2 Inspection of killed wild game presented for dressing 18 8. ESTABLISHMENTS: DESIGN, FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT 19 8.1 Principles of meat hygiene applying to establishments, facilities and equipment 19 8.2 Design and construction of lair ages 19 8.3 Design and construction of slaughter areas 42 8.4 Design and construction of areas where bodies of animals are dressed or meat may otherwise be present 20 1 This Code supersedes the following Codex Codes of Practices: Recommended International Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Meat (CXC 11-1976, Rev. 1-1993);Recommended International Code of Hygienic Practice for Game (CXC 29-1983, Rev. 1-1993); Recommended International Code for Ante-Mortem and Post-Mortem Inspection of Slaughter Animals and for Ante-Mortem and Post-Mortem Judgement of Slaughter Animals and Meat (CXC 41-1993); Recommended International Code of Hygienic Practice for Processed Meat and Poultry Products (CXC 13-1976, Rev. 1 (1985); Recommended Code of Hygienic Practice for Poultry Processing (CXC 14-1976); Recommended International Code of Practice for the Production, Storage and Composition of Mechanically Separated Meat Intended for Further Processing (CXC 32-1293). -- 1 of 51 -- CXC 58-2005 Page 2 of 51 8.5 Design and construction of equipment where bodies of animals are dressed or meat may be present 22 8.6 Water supply 22 8.7 Temperature control 23 8.8 Facilities and equipment for personal hygiene 23 8.9 Transport vehicles 24 9. PROCESS CONTROL 24 9.1 Principles of meat hygiene applying to process control 24 9.2 Process control systems 25 9.2.1 Sanitation Standard Operating Procedures (Sops) 26 9.2.2 HACCP 26 9.2.3 Outcome-based parameters for process control 27 9.2.4 Regulatory systems 28 9.2.5 Quality Assurance (QA) systems 29 9.3 General hygiene requirements for process control 29 9.4 Hygiene requirements for slaughter and dressing 30 9.5 Post-mortem inspection 32 9.5.1 Design of post-mortem inspection systems 32 9.5.2 Implementation of post-mortem inspection 33 9.6 Post-mortem judgement 35 9.7 Hygiene requirements for process control after post-mortem inspection 36 9.8 Hygiene requirements for parts of animals deemed unsafe or unsuitable for human consumption 40 9.9 Systems for removing products that are in circulation 40 10. ESTABLISHMENTS: MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION 41 10.1 Principles of meat hygiene applying to maintenance and sanitation of establishments, facilities and equipment 41 10.2 Maintenance and sanitation 41 11. PERSONAL HYGIENE 42 11.1 Personal cleanliness 43 11.2 Personal health status 43 12. TRANSPORTATION 43 13. PRODUCT INFORMATION AND CONSUMER AWARENESS 44 14. TRAINING 44 14.1 Principles of training in meat hygiene 44 14.2 Training programmes 44 ANNEXES ANNEX I - RISK-BASED EVALUATION OF ORGANOLEPTIC POST-MORTEM INSPECTION PROCEDURES FOR MEAT 46 ANNEX II - VERIFICATION OF PROCESS CONTROL OF MEAT HYGIENE BY MICROBIOLOGICAL TESTING 51 -- 2 of 51 -- CXC 58-2005 Page 3 of 51 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR MEAT 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Meat has traditionally been viewed as a vehicle for a significant proportion of human food-borne disease. Although the spectrum of meat-borne diseases of public health importance has changed with changing production and processing systems, continuation of the problem has been well illustrated in recent years by human surveillance studies of specific meat-borne pathogens such as Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp. and Yersinia enterocolitica. In addition to existing biological, chemical and physical hazards, new hazards are also appearing e.g. the agent of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). Furthermore consumers have expectations about suitability issues which are not necessarily of human health significance. 2. A contemporary risk-based approach to meat hygiene requires that hygiene measures should be applied at those points in the food chain where they will be of greatest value in reducing food-borne risks to consumers. This should be reflected in application of specific measures based on science and risk assessment, with a greater emphasis on prevention and control of contamination during all aspects of production of meat and its further processing. Application of HACCP principles is an essential element. The measure of success of contemporary programmes is an objective demonstration of levels of hazard control in food that are correlated with required levels of consumer protection, rather than by concentrating on detailed and prescriptive measures that give an unknown outcome. 3. At the national level the activities of the Competent Authority having jurisdiction at the slaughterhouse (usually Veterinary Administrations2) very often serve animal health as well as public health objectives. This is particularly the case in relation to ante- and post-mortem inspection where the slaughterhouse is a key point in animal health surveillance, including zoonoses. Regardless of jurisdictional arrangements, it is important that this duality of functions is recognized and relevant public health and animal health activities are integrated. 4. A number of national governments are implementing systems that redefine the respective roles of industry and government in delivering meat hygiene activities. Irrespective of the delivery systems the competent authority is responsible for defining the role of personnel involved in meat hygiene activities where appropriate, and verifying that all regulatory requirements are met. 5. The principles of food safety risk management3 should be incorporated wherever appropriate in the design and implementation of meat hygiene programmes. Specifically, work conducted by JEMRA, JECFA and FAO/WHO Expert Consultations and resulting risk management recommendations should be considered. Further, newly-recognised meat-borne risks to human health may require measures additional to those usually applied in meat hygiene, e.g. the potential for zoonotic transmission of central nervous system disorders of slaughtered livestock means that additional animal health surveillance programmes may need to be undertaken. 2. SCOPE AND USE OF THIS CODE 6. The scope of this code covers hygiene provisions for raw meat, meat preparations and manufactured meat from the time of live animal production up to the point of retail sale. It further develops General Principles of Food Hygiene' 4 in respect of these products. Where appropriate, the Annex to that code (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point System and Guidelines for its Application) and the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods5 are further developed and applied in the specific context of meat hygiene. 2 See also OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code chapter 6.2 “Control of biological hazards of animal health and public health importance through ante- and post-mortem meat inspection.”. 3 Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in the Framework of the Codex Alimentarius (Codex Procedural Manual); Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CXG 63- 2007). 4 CXC 1-1969. 5 CXG 21-1997. -- 3 of 51 -- CXC 58-2005 Page 4 of 51 7. For the purposes of this code, meat is that derived from domestic ungulates, domestic solipeds, domestic birds, lagomorphs, farmed game, farmed game birds (including ratites) and wild game. This Code of Practice may also be applied to other types of animals from which meat is derived, subject to any special hygienic measures required by the competent authority. Further to general hygiene measures applying to all species of animal as described above, this code also presents specific measures that apply to different species and classes of animals, e.g. wild game killed in the field. 8. The hygiene measures that are applied to the products described in this code, should take into account any further measures and food handling practices that are likely to be applied by the consumer. It should be noted that some of the products described in this code may not be subjected to a heat or other biocidal process before consumption. 9. Meat hygiene is by nature a complex activity, and this code refers to standards, texts and other recommendations developed elsewhere in the Codex system where linkages are appropriate, e.g. Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CXG 20 - 1995), Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CXG 63-2007), General Guidelines for Use of the Term "Halal" (CXG 24-1997) and the Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CXC 54-2004). 10. To provide information that will enhance consistency, linkages should also be made to the standards, guidelines and recommendations contained in the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code that relate to zoonoses. 11. Subsets of the general principles (Section 4) are provided in subsequent sections within ‘double-line boxes’. Where guidelines are provided at the section level, those that are more prescriptive in nature are presented in ‘single-line boxes’. This is to indicate that they are recommendations based on current knowledge and practice. They should be regarded as being flexible in nature and subject to alternative provisions so long as required outcomes in terms of the safety and suitability of meat are met. 12. Traditional practices may result in departures from some of the meat hygiene recommendations presented in this code when meat is produced for local trade. 3. DEFINITIONS 13. For the purposes of this code, the following definitions apply. (Note that more general definitions relating to food hygiene appear in the General Principles of Food Hygiene6). Abattoir Any establishment where specified animals are slaughtered and dressed for human consumption and that is approved, registered and/or listed by the competent authority for such purposes. Animal Animals of the following types:  Domestic ungulates;  Domestic solipeds;  Domestic birds i.e. poultry;  Lagomorphs;  Farmed game;  Farmed game birds, including ratites;  Wild game, i.e. wild land mammals and birds which are hunted (including those living in enclosed territory under conditions of freedom similar to those of wild game);  Animals as otherwise specified by the competent authority. Ante-mortem inspection7 Any procedure or test conducted by a competent person on live animals for the purpose of judgement of safety and suitability and disposition Carcass The body of an animal after dressing. 6 General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 7 These and other procedures and tests stipulated by the Competent Authority, may also be conducted, in particular for the purposes of animal health. -- 4 of 51 -- CXC 58-2005 Page 5 of 51 Chemical residues Residues of veterinary drugs and pesticides as described in the Definitions for the Purpose of the Codex Alimentarius8. Competent authority9 The official authority charged by the government with the control of meat hygiene, including setting and enforcing regulatory meat hygiene requirements. Competent body A body officially recognised and overseen by the competent authority to undertake specified meat hygiene activities. Competent person A person who has the training, knowledge, skills and ability to perform an assigned task, and who is subject to requirements specified by the competent authority. Condemned Inspected and judged by a competent person, or otherwise determined by the competent authority, as being unsafe or unsuitable for human consumption and requiring appropriate disposal. Contaminant Any biological or chemical agent, foreign matter, or other substance not intentionally added to food that may compromise food safety or suitability.10 Disease or defect Any abnormality affecting safety and/or suitability. Dressing The progressive separation of the body of an animal into a carcass and other edible and inedible parts. Equivalence The capability of different meat hygiene systems to meet the same food safety and/or suitability objectives. Establishment A building or area used for performing meat hygiene activities that is approved, registered and/or listed by the competent authority for such purposes. Establishment operator The person in control of an establishment who is responsible for ensuring that the regulatory meat hygiene requirements are met. Food safety objective (FSO) The maximum frequency and/or concentration of a hazard in a food at the time of consumption that provides or contributes to the appropriate level of protection (ALOP). Fresh Meat Meat that apart from refrigeration has not been treated for the purpose of preservation other than through protective packaging and which retains its natural characteristics. Game depot A building in which killed wild game is temporarily held prior to transfer to an establishment, and which is approved, registered and/or listed by the competent authority for this purpose. (Note that for the purposes of this code, a game depot is a particular type of establishment). Good Hygienic Practice (GHP) All practices regarding the conditions and measures necessary to ensure the safety and suitability of food at all stages of the food chain.11 Hazard A biological, chemical or physical agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an adverse health effect.12 8 Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 9 The Competent Authority provides official assurances in international trade of meat. Requirements for certification for public health and fair trade purposes have been developed by the Codex Committee on Food and Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (ref. CXG 26-1997). Requirements for certification for animal health (including zoonoses) purposes are contained in the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code (ref. Section 1.2 Obligations and ethics in inte