CXC 46 Page 1 of 20 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR REFRIGERATED PACKAGED FOODS WITH EXTENDED SHELF LIFE CXC 46-(1999) TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION 3 1 OBJECTIVES 3 2 SCOPE AND USE OF THE DOCUMENT 4 2.1 Scope 4 2.2 Use 4 2.3 Definitions 4 3 PRIMARY PRODUCTION 5 4 ESTABLISHMENT : DESIGN AND FACILITIES 6 4.1 Location 6 4.2 Premises and rooms 6 4.3 Equipment 6 4.4 Facilities 7 5 CONTROL OF OPERATION 8 5.1 Control of food hazards 9 5.2 Key aspects of hygiene control systems 11 5.3 Incoming material requirements 13 5.4 Packaging 14 5.5 Water 15 5.6 Management and supervision 15 5.7 Documentation and records 15 5.8 Recall procedures 15 6 ESTABLISHMENT: MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION 15 6.1 Maintenance and cleaning 15 6.2 Cleaning programmes 16 6.3 Pest control systems 17 6.4 Waste management 17 6.5 Monitoring effectiveness 17 7 ESTABLISHMENT: PERSONAL HYGIENE 17 7.1 Health status 17 7.2 Illness and injuries 17 7.3 Personal cleanliness 17 7.4 Personal behaviour 18 7.5 Visitors 18 8 TRANSPORTATION 18 8.1 General 18 8.2 Requirements 18 8.3 Use and maintenance 18 9 PRODUCT INFORMATION AND CONSUMER AWARENESS 18 -- 1 of 20 -- CXC 46 Page 2 of 20 9.1 Lot identification 18 9.2 Product information 18 9.3 Labelling 18 9.4 Consumer education 19 10 TRAINING 19 10.1 Awareness and responsibilities 19 10.2 Training programmes 19 10.3 Instruction and supervision 19 10.4 Refresher training 19 Appendix – Hurdles 20 -- 2 of 20 -- CXC 46 Page 3 of 20 INTRODUCTION Refrigerated packaged foods with extended shelf life are foodstuffs that are kept refrigerated to preserve them for more than five days as described in item 2.1 Scope. In general, the heat or other preservation treatments that these products receive is not sufficient to ensure their commercial sterility. Refrigeration is an important hurdle that retards food spoilage and growth of most pathogens. It is the responsibility of the manufacturer to ensure that the product produced is safe throughout its shelf-life, taking into consideration the potential for temperature abuse. This may warrant the use of hurdles to microbial growth in addition to refrigeration. There are possibilities for temperature abuse during manufacture, storage, distribution, sale, and handling by the consumer. These temperature abuses may allow the growth of pathogenic microorganisms unless additional hurdles are built into the product to prevent potential microbial growth. Moreover, refrigeration alone is not always sufficient to minimize microbiological risk, since some microorganisms are psychrotrophic (grow at refrigeration temperatures), for example, certain strains of Listeria monocytogenes or certain strains Clostridium botulinum, which can grow at temperatures of 4°C or lower. Therefore, in the absence of additional hurdles, there is likelihood that some of these undesirable microorganisms will proliferate at refrigeration temperatures. There are other potential hazards associated with certain refrigerated foods. For example, with modified atmosphere packaged (MAP) foods, the anaerobic environment limits growth of aerobic microorganisms which compete with pathogenic microorganisms. Since these aerobic microorganisms are limited or do not grow in MAP foods, certain pathogenic microorganisms may proliferate. Aerobic microorganisms are also often the microorganisms that cause product spoilage. Because significant growth of aerobic microorganisms is prevented, MAP products may become unsafe without any visible signs of spoilage if not appropriately refrigerated or in the absence of additional hurdles. Microbiological hazards can be controlled by a combination of inhibiting factors, called hurdles. These hurdles can assist in retarding or preventing growth of some microorganisms, including pathogenic microorganisms. Some of the hurdles in addition to refrigeration include: decreased pH and aw, and addition of preservatives. 1 OBJECTIVES The purpose of this code is to set out recommendations for processing, packaging, storage and distribution of refrigerated packaged foods with extended shelf-life. Its aim is preventing the outgrowth of pathogenic microorganisms and it is based on the principles of Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP). Section 5.1 of this code discusses the application of HACCP principles to refrigerated packaged foods with extended shelf life. The HACCP approach is described in Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application (Annex to CXC 1-1969, Rev 3-1997). It should be noted that HACCP is product, process and facility specific. For refrigerated foods, an important safety hurdle to control microbial growth is refrigeration (for example, +4°C). Any recommendation for specific temperatures should be considered guidelines only. The actual temperatures used will depend upon the requirements for the product, and processes used in terms of safety. However, a wide variety of refrigerated foods also make use of additional hurdles to achieve a synergistic effect for the control of microbial growth. When using the hurdle concept for product development, even where refrigeration is the sole hurdle, the effect of the hurdle(s) on product safety and shelf life should be considered thoroughly. Predictive microbiological models may be used to estimate both the effectiveness of preservation conditions and the effects of modifying product composition and varying handling/storage conditions on safety. Unless scientific evidence previously exists, challenge studies should be conducted to confirm the effectiveness of the chosen hurdle(s) against the pathogen(s) of concern. Such studies, in which specific organisms are inoculated into products, should use the worst case conditions of expected storage and distribution. The results of these studies should be used to determine the appropriate shelf life for the product under consideration. -- 3 of 20 -- CXC 46 Page 4 of 20 2 SCOPE AND USE OF THE DOCUMENT 2.1 SCOPE This code covers low-acid refrigerated foods that are heat treated1 and are susceptible to outgrowth of pathogenic microorganisms during their extended shelf-life. The foods which the provisions of this code addresses are products that:  are intended to be refrigerated during their shelf life to retard or prevent the proliferation of undesirable microorganisms;  have an extended shelf life of more than 5 days2;  are heat treated or processed using other treatments to reduce their original microbiological population;  are low acid, that is, with pH > 4.6 and have high water activity aw > 0.92;  may use hurdles in addition to heat or other treatments and refrigeration, to retard or prevent the proliferation of undesirable microorganisms;  are packaged, not necessarily hermetically, before or after processing (heat or other preservation treatments);  may or may not require heating prior to consumption. Examples of such products are:  cooked refrigerated ready to eat meals,  cooked refrigerated ready to eat meats, poultry, seafood and their products, sauces, dips, vegetables, soups, egg products, pasta, ... This Code excludes: raw foods, frozen foods, low acid canned foods, acid and acidified foods stored at ambient temperature, smoked fish, milk and milk products, yellow fats and fat spreads. It should be noted that this code is not intended to cover products such as: fermented meats and meat products, cured meats and meat products (including poultry), fermented vegetables, dried and/or salted fish and meats. In addition, it excludes those food products for which there is a specific Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice. Foods that contain one or more ingredients that are excluded and one or more ingredients that are included are covered by this Code. 2.2 USE This document follows the structure of the Codex International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969, Rev. 3-1997) The General Principles of Food Hygiene must be used with this Code. Each section provides recommendations specific to safety of refrigerated packaged foods with extended shelf life. 2.3 DEFINITIONS Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. 1 New technology such as microwave heating, ohmic heating, oscillating magnetic field, high hydrostatic pressure, irradiation, etc., may provide equivalent treatment. 2 The Codex Code of Hygienic Practice for Precooked and Cooked Foods in the Mass Catering (CXC 39-1993) should be consulted for foods having a shelf life of 5 days or less. -- 4 of 20 -- CXC 46 Page 5 of 20 For purposes of this code, the terms and expressions below are defined as follows: Container (i.e. primary package): any box, tin, plastic or other receptacle, or wrapper in direct contact with the food product. Cooling equipment: equipment to reduce a product's temperature. Filling and sealing: operation consisting of placing a food product in a container and closing it. Hermetically sealed container: Containers which are designed and intended to protect the contents against the entry of viable microorganisms after closing. High Risk (HR) Area: An area that requires a high level of hygiene, where the practices concerning personnel, materials, equipment and the environment are managed so as to prevent contamination by pathogenic microorganisms and should be designated and segregated. The HACCP approach will allow the identification of when the use of a High Risk area is necessary. Hurdle: microbial growth limiting, retarding or preventative factor. Hurdle technology: the use of a combination of factors to effect control of microbial growth. Modified atmosphere: atmosphere in a packaged product (vacuum or gas) that differs from the ambient atmosphere. Packaging: any operation consisting of placing the food in containers (i.e. primary packaging) or placing the food containers in further packaging material. Packaging material: materials such as cardboard, paper, glass, plastic film, metal, etc., used to manufacture containers or packaging for refrigerated packaged food. Pasteurization value: the length of time at a given temperature required to obtain a specified level of destruction of a microorganism whose heat resistance characteristics are known. The heat resistance of a microorganism is characterized by D and z values defined as follows: D = time (in minutes) to achieve a 90% or one log reduction of a microbiological population at a given temperature; z = the number of degrees required for the thermal destruction curve to traverse one log cycle (expressed in degrees Celsius or Fahrenheit). Rapid cooling: lowering the temperature of the food in a way such that the critical zone for microbiological proliferation (60°C -10°C) is passed through as rapidly as possible and the specified temperature is attained. Refrigerated food: Food which is kept at cold storage temperatures to maintain its safety, quality and suitability, for the intended shelf life. Refrigerated storage facility: facility designed to keep refrigerated foods at the intended temperature. Shelf life: The period during which the product maintains its microbiological safety and sensory qualities at a specific storage temperature. It is based on identified hazards for the product, heat or other preservation treatments, packaging method and other hurdles or inhibiting factors that may be used. Use-by-date: The date after which the product should not be consumed. It is determined from the date of production, utilizing the product shelf life, building in a margin of safety as determined by the manufacturer. 3 PRIMARY PRODUCTION Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. For recommendations relative to incoming materials see Section 5.3. -- 5 of 20 -- CXC 46 Page 6 of 20 4 ESTABLISHMENT : DESIGN AND FACILITIES Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. This section deals with the areas where foods are prepared, cooked, chilled, and stored. Prevention of contamination calls for every reasonable measure to be taken to avoid direct or indirect contact of food with sources of potential contamination. There should be a strict separation in the plant of the High Risk area(s) from other production area(s). 4.1 LOCATION Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. 4.2 PREMISES AND ROOMS 4.2.1 Design and layout Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. In HR areas:  High risk areas should be designed to minimize the potential for build-up of contamination and to maximize the ease of cleaning and disinfection.  To keep raw materials, in-process products and final products in optimal condition and protected from cross-contamination, storage and processing facilities should also follow the principles of "one-way- flow" and "first in, first out" and be equipped to maintain temperature, humidity and ventilation 4.2.2 Internal structures and fittings Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. In HR areas: - entrances should be provided with cleaning and/or changing facilities for shoes and protective clothing, and hand washing and sanitizing stations. - windows should not be capable of being opened. Doors should be close-fitting and their condition, sitting and use should not compromise food safety. - where appropriate the premises should be equipped with temperature monitoring and recording devices and a reliable system, to signal loss of control, for example, an audible alarm or blinking light. - air should be filtered and under positive pressure in locations where foods are handled in order to limit contamination. - systems for steam removal and humidity control should be effective, hygienically designed and well maintained to minimize condensation or other cross contamination between raw materials and processed products. 4.2.3 Temporary/mobile premises and vending machines Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. 4.3 EQUIPMENT 4.3.1 General Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. -- 6 of 20 -- CXC 46 Page 7 of 20 In HR areas: - Equipment used for processing, handling or transport within the HR area should be used solely in this area. No equipment should enter the area without being cleaned and disinfected. - Equipment used for handling heat-treated products should be solely for this purpose and should be kept separate from equipment used to handle material before heat or other preservation treatments. If reusable trays are used, once they are cleaned and sanitized they should not pass through an area where they may be contaminated unless they are appropriately protected. 4.3.2 Food control and monitoring equipment Refer to the International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene. In HR areas: - All apparatus used should be regularly checked and calibrated according to an e