CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR FRESH FRUITS AND VEGETABLES CXC 53-2003 Adopted in 2003. Revised in: 2010 (new Annex III for fresh leafy vegetables), 2012 (new Annex IV for Melons), 2013 (new Annex V for Berries), 2017. -- 1 of 39 -- CXC 53-2003 2 INTRODUCTION Scientific research over recent decades has shown that a diet rich in fruits and vegetables promotes good health. This recognition of the importance of the routine consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables, together with a significant increase in the year-round availability of such products from the global market, has contributed to the substantial increase in their consumption over the past two decades. However, continuing reports of food-borne illness associated with fresh fruits and vegetables haveincreased concern among public health agencies and consumers about the safety of these products. The microbiological pathogens associated with fresh fruits and vegetables include Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., Campylobacter, pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli, Listeria monocytogenes, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, norovirus, hepatitis A virus and parasites such as Cyclospora cayetanensis, Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum. 1. OBJECTIVES OF THE CODE This Code addresses Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and Good Hygienic Practices (GHPs) that help control microbial, chemical and physical hazards associated with all stages of the production of fresh fruits and vegetables, from primary production to consumption. Particular attention is given to minimizing microbial hazards. The Code provides a general framework of recommendations that can be uniformly adopted across the sector rather than detailed recommendations for specific agricultural practices, operations or commodities. The fresh fruit and vegetable industry is very complex. Fresh fruits and vegetables are produced and packed under diverse environmental conditions. It is recognized that some of the provisions in this Code may be difficult to implement in areas where primary production is conducted in small holdings, whether in developed or developing countries, and in areas where traditional farming is practiced. The Code is therefore, by necessity, a flexible one, to allow for different systems of control and prevention of contamination for different groups of commodities. 2. SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITIONS 2.1 Scope This Code covers general hygienic practices from primary production to consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables cultivated for human consumption in order to produce safe and wholesome products, in particular for those intended to be consumed raw. Specifically, this Code is applicable to fresh fruits and vegetables grown in open fields or in protected facilities (hydroponic systems, greenhouses/net houses, etc.). It concentrates on microbial hazards and addresses physical and chemical hazards only in so far as they relate to GAPs and GHPs. The Annexes for Ready-to-Eat, Fresh, Pre-cut Fruits and Vegetables (Annex I), Sprout Production (Annex II), Fresh Leafy Vegetables (Annex III), Melons (Annex IV) and Berries (Annex V) are supplements to this Code and include additional recommendations to cover hygienic practices specific to these commodities. 2.2 Use This Code follows the format of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) and should be used in conjunction with it and other applicable codes, such as the Guidelines on the Application of General Principles of Food Hygiene to the Control of Foodborne Parasites (CXG 88-2016), Guidelines on the Application of General Principles of Food Hygiene to the Control of Viruses in Food (CXG 79-2012), the Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 44-1995), the Code of Practice for the Processing and Handling of Quick Frozen Foods (CXC 8-1976), and theGuidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77- 2011). Due to the wide variation in the nature of fruits and vegetables and production practices, flexibility in application is an essential element of this Code. The implementation of any hygienic practices is proportionate to the risk of food-borne illness or the characteristics of the commodity (e.g. conditions and practices associated with growing fruits from tall trees and that have inedible peel, such as durian, mangosteen, coconut and rambutan, present a lower likelihood of contamination at primary production than fruits such as melons or berries grown on or near the ground). 2.3 Definitions Definitions of general expressions are included in the General Principles of Food Hygiene. For the purposes of this Code, the following terms are defined as below: Agricultural inputs– Any incoming material (e.g. seeds, fertilizers, including compost, water, agricultural chemicals, plant support) used for the primary production of fresh fruits and vegetables. -- 2 of 39 -- CXC 53-2003 3 Agricultural worker – Any person who undertakes one or more of the following: cultivation, harvesting and packing of fresh fruits and vegetables. Biocides–A chemical substance or micro-organism intended to destroy, deter, render harmless or exert a controlling effect on any harmful organism by chemical or biological means. Biological control –The use of biological agents (e.g. insects, micro-organisms and/or microbial metabolites) for the control of mites, pests, plant pathogens and spoilage organisms. Biofilm – A microbial consortium adhering to a surface. Biosolids –Nutrient-rich organic materials resulting from the treatment of sewage sludge (the name for the solid, semisolid or liquid residue generated during the treatment of domestic sewage in a treatment facility). Composting –A managed process in which organic materials are digested aerobically or anaerobically by microbial action. Cull – The removal of any product or part of product that is of inadequate quality, including due to physical damage (such as broken skin or decay). Cultivation –Any agricultural action or practice used by growers to allow and improve the growing conditions of fresh fruits or vegetables whether grown in an open field or in protected facilities (e.g. hydroponic systems, greenhouses/net houses). Farm –Any premises or establishment in which fresh fruits and/or vegetables are grown and harvested. Flooding –The flowing or overflowing of a field with water that is not under the control of the grower. Pooled water (e.g. after rainfall) that is not reasonably likely to cause contamination of the edible portions of fresh produce is not considered flooding. Grower –A person responsible for the management of the primary production of fresh fruits and vegetables. Greenhouse – An indoor site, generally enclosed by glass or plastic, in whichplants are grown. Harvester –A person responsible for the management of the harvesting of fresh fruits and vegetables. Hydroponics –A general term for the production of plants without soil in an aqueous nutrient medium. Manure –Animal excrement, which may be mixed with litter or other material, and may be fermented or otherwise treated. Micro-organisms –These include yeasts, moulds, bacteria, viruses and parasites; the corresponding adjective is “microbial”. Packer –A person responsible for the management of post-harvest activities and packing of fresh fruits and vegetables. Packing or Packaging – The action of putting fresh fruits andvegetables in a container (e.g. box, crate or basket) or package. This may take place in a field or within an establishment. Packing establishment/Packaging establishment or Packhouse/Packing house –Any premises on which fresh fruits and vegetables are packed/packaged. Post-harvest activities– Activities performed incidental to packing involving minimal transformation of fresh fruits and vegetables, such as washing, sorting, culling, grading, cutting and trimming. Primary production of fruits and vegetables –The steps involved in the growing and harvesting of fresh fruits and vegetables, includingsoil preparation, planting, irrigation, the application of fertilizers and agricultural chemicals, field-packing and transport to a packing establishment. Ready-to-eat fresh fruits and vegetables–Any fruit or vegetable that is normally eaten in its raw state, intended for direct human consumption without anyfurther microbiocidal steps. This may include any fruit or vegetable that has been washed, peeled, cut or otherwise physically altered from its original form but remains in the fresh state. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)–A set of detailed instructions describing how to carry out a routine activity. Types of water: Clean water –Water that does not compromise food safety in the circumstances of its use. -- 3 of 39 -- CXC 53-2003 4 Potable water –Water which meets the quality standards of drinking water such as described in the W orld Health Organization (WHO) Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality. 3. PRIMARY PRODUCTION Refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) in addition to the following: Fresh fruits and vegetables are grown and harvested under a diverse range of climatic and geographical conditions. They can be grown in production sites indoors (e.g. greenhouses) and outdoors, harvested and either field-packed or transported to a packing establishment, using various agricultural inputs and technologies, and on farms of varying sizes. Biological, chemical and physical hazards may therefore vary significantly from one type of production to another. In each primary production area, it is necessary to consider the particular agricultural practices that promote the production of safe fresh fruits and vegetables, taking into account the conditions specific to the primary production area, type of products, and methods used. Procedures associated with primary production should be conducted under good hygienic conditions and should minimize potential hazards to health due to the contamination of fresh fruits and vegetables. 3.1 Environmental Hygiene As far as possible, potential sources of environmental contamination should be identified prior to primary production activities. In particular, primary production should not be carried out in areas where the presence of potentially harmful substances would lead to an unacceptable level of such substances in or on fresh fruits and vegetables after harvest. Where possible, growers should evaluate present and previous uses of both indoor and outdoor fresh fruit and vegetable primary production site(s) and the adjoining land (e.g. crop grown, feed lot, animal production, hazardous waste site, sewage treatment site, industry) in order to identify potential microbial hazards. The potential for other types of contamination (e.g. from agricultural chemicals, mining extraction site, hazardous wastes) should also be taken into consideration. If previous uses cannot be identified, or the examination of the growing or adjoining sites leads to the conclusion that potential hazards exist, the sites should be analysed for contaminants of concern. The assessment of environmental conditions is particularly important because subsequent steps may not be adequate to remove contamination that occurs during production and in some cases may lead to conditions that enable the growth of microbial pathogens. If the environment presents a risk to the primary production site, measures should be implemented to minimize the contamination of fresh fruit and vegetable at the site. When such risks are serious, the production site should not be used for fresh fruit and vegetable production. The effects of some environmental events cannot be controlled. For example, heavy rains may increase the exposure of fresh fruits and vegetables to pathogens if soil contaminated with pathogens splashes onto them. When heavy rains occur, growers should evaluate the need to postpone harvesting fresh fruits and vegetables for direct consumption and/or to subject them to a treatment that will minimize the risk from pathogens. The risk from chemical hazards should also be assessed. The risk of contamination is greatest when heavy rains cause flooding and flood waters come into direct contact with fresh fruits and vegetables. If fruits and vegetables that have come into contact with flood waters are not submitted to any measure to mitigate risks, they should not be eaten raw. This does not include flood irrigation,1 where the source of water is of known and appropriate quality. 3.1.1 Location of the Production Site Production site locations should be evaluated, including with regard to slope, potential for runoff (including from manure sources), flood risk and hydrological features in proximity to the primary production site. The proximity of high-risk production sites, such as animal primary production facilities, hazardous waste sites and waste treatment facilities, should be evaluated for the potential to contaminate production fields or water sources with microbial or other environmental hazards (e.g. runoff, faecal material, aerosols, organic waste). Growers should take measures to mitigate the risks associated with runoff and flooding (e.g. mapping the production field, terracing, digging a shallow ditch to prevent runoff from entering the field). In the case of risk of contamination from dust, drift or aerosols, efforts should be made to protect fresh produce-growing and -handling areas. The use of an effective wind-break (whether natural, such as trees, or a constructed barrier) or protective covering are measures that could be used to reduce pathogen and chemical contamination of the primary production site. ___________________________________________________________________________ 1 Anirrigation system whereby water is pumped or brought onto a field and allowed to flow along the ground among the crops. -- 4 of 39 -- CXC 53-2003 5 The Code of Practice concerning source-directed measures to reduce contamination of food with chemicals (CXC 49-2001) should be taken into consideration in determining which fruits and vegetables to grow, since different crops absorb heavy metals and other environmental contaminants at varying rates. 3.1.2 Animals and human activity Humans and many animal species that may be present in the primary production environment are known to be potential carriers of food-borne pathogens. Wild animals represent a particularly difficult risk to manage because their presence is intermittent. When the environmental hygiene step (Section 3.1) evaluates the risk as serious, and animals and human activities may present the risk of direct contamination of the crop and soil, as well as indirect contamination via surface water sources and other inputs, efforts should be made to minimize contamination. The following should be taken into consideration: • Appropriate biological, cultivation, physical and chemical pest-control methods should be used in order to exclude animals from the primary production and handling areas to the extent practicable