CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR LOW-MOISTURE FOODS CXC 75-2015 Adopted in 2015. Revised in 2016. Amended in 2018. -- 1 of 21 -- CXC 75-2015 2 1. INTRODUCTION There are many different types of products that fall under the grouping of low-moisture foods. Since 2001, there have been a number of outbreaks associated with the consumption of low-moisture foods, which has raised concerns regarding the safety of these products. The primary pathogens of concern that are associated with low- moisture foods to date, include Salmonella spp. and Bacillus cereus. However, most outbreak-related illnesses associated with low-moisture foods have been caused by Salmonella spp. and, for this reason, the Code of Hygienic Practice focuses on controls for Salmonella spp. The water activity (aw) of low-moisture foods is often well below 0.85 and foodborne pathogens such as Salmonella cannot multiply under these conditions. Even though pathogen growth is prevented in these products, the cells can remain viable for extended periods of time. For Salmonella spp., the infectious dose is thought to be very low, as demonstrated by the small numbers of cells per serving recovered from low-moisture foods implicated in outbreaks. Furthermore, there is evidence that the composition of a food (especially, high fat content) may protect Salmonella against the acidic conditions of the stomach, potentially increasing the likelihood of illness from consuming low numbers of the organism. Pathogens such as Salmonella can be difficult to control in a low-moisture food operation environment, because they can persist for prolonged periods of time in the dry state and in low-moisture products. Microorganisms are more heat tolerant in food matrices at reduced water activity. Investigations from Salmonella outbreaks indicate that the safety of low-moisture foods depends fundamentally on the control of Salmonella in the food operation environment. Maintaining good hygienic practices, hygienic design of equipment, proactive maintenance programmes, control of incoming materials, and effective ingredient control in the low-moisture food establishment, will help prevent the contamination of low-moisture foods with pathogens. Special attention should be paid to those products that are exposed to the processing environment following a pathogen reduction step, products that are not subjected to a pathogen reduction step, and products for which ingredients are added after a pathogen reduction step. SECTION I - OBJECTIVES This Code addresses Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) and Good Hygienic Practices (GHPs) that will help control microbial hazards associated with all stages of the manufacturing of low-moisture foods. Particular attention is given to minimize Salmonella spp., which is currently considered the primary pathogen of concern in these products. These GMPs and GHPs, if adhered to, should also be effective in preventing the risk from other pathogens that may be of concern. SECTION II - SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITIONS 2.1 Scope This Code covers GMPs/GHPs for the manufacturing of low-moisture foods for human consumption. This Code applies to, dried fruits and vegetables (e.g. desiccated coconut), cereal-based products (e.g. breakfast cereals), peanut and other nut butters, dry protein products1 (e.g. dried dairy products and soy protein), confections (e.g. chocolate and cocoa), snacks (e.g. spice-seasoned chips/crisps), tree nuts, seeds for consumption (e.g. sesame seeds and sesame seed paste), spices and dried culinary herbs, and specialized lipid based nutritional products2 for the treatment of moderate and severely acute malnutrition3. Milled grain products such as flour may be within the scope when used in foods that would not be subject to a microbial inactivation step. 2.2 Use This Code follows the format of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) and should be used in conjunction with it, as well as with other applicable codes such as the Code of Hygienic Practice for Dried Fruits (CXC 3-1969), Code of Hygienic Practice for Desiccated Coconut (CXC 4-1971), Code of Hygienic Practice for Dehydrated Fruits and Vegetables including Edible Fungi (CXC 5-1971), Code of Hygienic Practice for Tree Nuts (CXC 6-1972), and Code of Hygienic Practice for Groundnuts (Peanuts) (CXC 22-1979). When designing and implementing food safety control systems for products according to the provisions of commodity specific Codes of Hygienic Practices (e.g. Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CXC 57- 2004)) the recommended practices and measures of this Code should be taken into consideration. 1 Report of an FAO/WHO Consultation Process: Ranking of Low Moisture Foods in Support of Microbiological Risk Management (to be published). 2 Specialized lipid based nutritional products can be categorized as ready-to-use supplementary foods (RUSF) for the treatment of moderate acute malnutrition and ready-to-use therapeutic foods (RUTF) for the treatment of severely acute malnutrition. 3 Although the provisions of this Code could be applied in the production of powdered infant formula, this product is excluded from the scope, given the specific vulnerable group of consumers. These products are currently appropriately addressed in the Code of Hygienic Practice for Powdered Formulae for Infants and Young Children (CXC 66-2008). -- 2 of 21 -- CXC 75-2015 3 The provisions in this document should be applied as appropriate, with consideration of the diversity of ingredients, processes, and control measures of the products and various degrees of risk involved in producing low-moisture foods. 2.3 Definitions Refer to definitions in the General Principles of Food Hygiene and other applicable codes (see section 2.2 of this code for the list of additional applicable codes). In addition, the following terms have the meaning stated: Controlled wet cleaning – the removal of soil, including food residues, dirt, grease or other objectionable matter using a limited amount of water and detergents and controlling the spread of the water used. Dry cleaning – the removal of soil, including food residues, dirt, grease or other objectionable matter by actions such as wiping, sweeping, brushing, scraping, or vacuuming the residues without the use of water and detergents. Harbourage site – a site in the environment or on equipment (e.g. cracks, holes, junctions) that enables the accumulation of residues (e.g. food debris, dust, and water) potentially permitting the growth and/or survival of microorganisms such as Salmonella. Low-moisture foods – foods that have a water activity (aw) of 0.85 or below. Wet cleaning – the removal of soil, including food residues, dirt, grease or other objectionable matter using water and detergents. SECTION III - PRIMARY PRODUCTION Raw materials and ingredients used to manufacture low-moisture foods vary substantially. They are produced under different conditions and using various production methods and technologies. Therefore, microbial hazards vary significantly from one type of product to another and detailed discussions of the primary production methods of each raw material and ingredient is beyond the scope of this document. In each primary production area, it is necessary to consider practices that promote the production of safe food. Refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene and other applicable codes. SECTION IV - ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES 4.1 Location Refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene. 4.2 Premises and rooms Refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene. 4.2.1 Design and layout Proper hygienic design, zoning and layout of premises and rooms are essential to ensure that entry of pathogens into the establishment is controlled (e.g. minimizing the potential for entry and, in the case of entry, preventing the pathogen from becoming established in the environment). For example, if a pathogen such as Salmonella is introduced into the establishment, proper design and layout can prevent the transfer to areas where processed products are exposed to the environment prior to packaging. In establishments processing and packing low-moisture foods, dry processing areas should be designed to exclude moisture from the environment to the extent possible, in order to prevent growth and minimize the likelihood of a pathogen becoming established in the environment. Raw material handling, pre-processing and other areas (e.g. maintenance areas, waste areas, and toilet facilities) should be separated from post-processing handling areas. Additionally, physical separation within the low-moisture food establishment based on specific hygiene requirements will help minimize pathogen transfer from one area to another. Where an establishment uses a pathogen reduction step, the area following that step should be physically separated from other parts of the operation in order to implement different hygiene measures based on the type of production and the risk for pathogen introduction. In some establishments the design may include a transitional area in order to enhance hygiene measures prior to the area with the most stringent hygiene measures. This last approach should be considered for food intended specifically for consumers more susceptible to illness from foodborne pathogens, to facilitate the implementation of enhanced controls. Separation of one hygiene area from another and the control of dust can be achieved using physical barriers, such as walls, doors, split conveyers, etc. Alternatively, separation of areas and control of dust can also be achieved by the appropriate design of ventilation systems and airflow. -- 3 of 21 -- CXC 75-2015 4 Limiting the introduction and use of water is one of the primary means to control pathogens in low-moisture food establishments. In the low-moisture food establishment, there may be areas that only require dry cleaning and other areas where water is appropriately used. It is important that the layout and the hygienic design of the establishment ensure that areas intended for dry cleaning remain in a dry state and receive only dry cleaning and disinfection. If these sites are intended to be wet cleaned even occasionally, then the hygienic design should accommodate water while preventing the establishment of microbial harbourage sites. To limit the introduction of water in the processing areas requiring stringent hygiene controls, hand washing and footbath (if used) stations should be located outside, at the entrance of this area, and, to the extent possible, water distribution systems (e.g. piping) should be located outside the high hygiene area. Additionally, the infrastructure (e.g. ventilation, physical structure) should be designed to prevent entry of unwanted water from the surrounding processing area, as a result of processing activities or from cleaning and disinfecting activities or from outside the establishment. 4.2.2 Internal structures and fittings Overhead structures should be designed to minimize the accumulation of dust and dry materials, especially when they are directly above exposed products. Internal structures and fittings should be designed to eliminate cavities that could serve as microbial harbourage sites. In operations where condensate may form or where humidity is high, adequate control measures, such as drip pans or a ventilation system to remove environment humidity, should be in place to prevent condensate from contaminating products or creating conditions that allow the proliferation of pathogens such as Salmonella within the production environment. Entry and exit doors from basic (general) hygiene areas to areas of more stringent hygiene control should be tightly fitted and, if necessary, equipped with self-closing devices. 4.3 Equipment Refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene. 4.3.1 General Proper hygienic equipment design is essential to prevent contamination of the product with a pathogen from the processing environment and to ensure that if a pathogen such as Salmonella is introduced, it remains transient and does not become established in areas of the equipment that could serve as a source of product contamination. Equipment should be designed to facilitate cleaning with little or no water and, when controlled wet cleaning is required, to allow thorough drying before reusing the equipment for low-moisture foods. Alternatively, equipment should be designed for easy disassembly such that parts can be removed from the stringent hygiene area for wet cleaning in a separate location outside the area. The equipment design should be as simple as possible with a minimum number of parts, and to the extent possible, all parts should be accessible for inspection and cleaning. If water is required for washing, the equipment should be designed to accommodate water and should ensure rapid and complete drying to prevent microbial growth and the establishment of microbial harbourage sites. Furthermore, the equipment design should minimize the build-up of food residues and the creation of microbial harbourage sites. Particular attention should be given to the design of equipment located in areas that require the most stringent hygiene controls. A written document should be developed for equipment acceptance, as well as for cleaning, disinfecting and drying of equipment prior to allowing entry into the processing area. This is particularly important for used equipment, which may have been contaminated during its prior use. In order to minimize the potential for harbourage sites, hollow areas of equipment should be eliminated whenever possible or permanently sealed. Push buttons, valve handles, switches and touch screens should be designed to ensure product and other residues (including liquid) do not penetrate or accumulate and become a harbourage site. 4.4 Facilities Refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene. The integrity of the facilities should be inspected on a regular basis for problems such as the presence of bird nests or roosting sites, roof leaks, etc. Problems should be corrected as soon as they are detected to ensure a sound structure of the facility. -- 4 of 21 -- CXC 75-2015 5 4.4.2 Drainage and waste disposal Since limiting water is one of the primary means to control pathogens such as Salmonella in a low-moisture food establishment, the areas requiring stringent hygiene controls should ideally not have drains. However, if drains are present, the floors should be properly sloped for effective drainage and to allow for rapid drying and kept dry under normal conditions. The drains should be designed to prevent backflow, especially if drains are connected to areas with less stringent hygiene requirements. Additionally, when drains are present, these should be sealed during dry processing operations. When water is used in other areas such as the basic hygiene area, water drainage must ensure rapid drying. 4.4.3 Cleaning Areas where low-moisture foods are handled and