CXC 8- 1976 Page 1 of 14 Adopted in 1976. Revision 1978, 1983, 2008. CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE PROCESSING AND HANDLING OF QUICK FROZEN FOODS (CXC 8-1976) 1. SCOPE AND OBJECTIVE This Code applies to the receiving, preparation, processing, handling, storage, transport, distribution, and retailing of all quick frozen foods such as cereals, fruits and vegetables, fish, meat, poultry and their products, bakery and pastry products. The Code does not apply to edible ices, ice creams and milk. The objective of this Code is to provide guidance for the processing and handling of quick frozen food to help ensure product safety and other aspects of the production of quick frozen foods including, as appropriate, essential quality provisions, composition and labelling provisions of pertinent Codex commodity standards. The guidance, emphasizing proper cold chain management, incorporates good hygienic and good manufacturing practices and the application of the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) approach described in the HACCP Annex to the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969). A prerequisite programme is described in the Code, covering essential requirements of hygiene in the production of quick frozen foods that should be in place prior to the application of HACCP. The food hygiene provisions of this document are supplemental to, and must be used in conjunction with the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969). The Code should also, as appropriate, be used in conjunction with other Codex texts, including the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CXS 1-1985), codes of hygienic practice (e.g. Code of Hygienic Practice for the Transport of Food in Bulk and Semi-Packed Food (CXC 47-2001), Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CXC 58-2005)), codes of practice (e.g. Code of Practice for Fish and Fishery Products (CXC 52-2003)) as well as the Guidelines for the Validation of Food Safety Control Measures (CXG 69-2008). Reference can also be made, as appropriate, to Codex quick frozen food standards and/or provisions in relevant Codex texts. This Code including its Annex is intended to assist all those who are engaged in the processing and handling of quick frozen foods and/or are concerned with their storage, transportation, export, import and sale in attaining safe food products of appropriate quality. In addition, the Code may be used for training of employees of the quick frozen food industry. The application of this Code by countries is likely to require modifications and amendments, taking into account local conditions and specific consumer requirements. 2. DEFINITIONS The definitions listed below are for the purpose of this Code only: Blanching A heat process typically applied to a food for the purpose of inactivating enzymes and/or fixing the product colour. Cold chain A term embracing the continuity of successively employed means to maintain the temperature of foods, as appropriate, from receiving through processing, transport, storage and retailing. Prerequisite programme Programme required prior to the application of the HACCP system to ensure that any component of the cold chain is operating according to the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) appropriate Codex codes of practice, and other appropriate food safety legislation. Quick freezing process A process which is carried out in such a way that the range of temperature of maximum ice crystallization is passed as quickly as possible. Quick frozen food Food which has been subjected to a quick freezing process, and maintained at -18C or colder at all points in the cold chain, subject to permitted temperature tolerances. -- 1 of 14 -- CXC 8 Page 2 of 14 Thermal centre The point within a piece of food which has the highest temperature at the end of a quick freezing process. Tolerances Short term fluctuations of temperature of the product in the cold chain, within limits permitted in this Code and which do not affect safety and quality. 3. PREREQUISITE PROGRAMME In conjunction with the application of HACCP to any segment of the quick frozen food chain, that segment should be supported by prerequisite programmes based on good hygienic practice and good manufacturing practice. Prerequisite programmes should be specific within an individual establishment, and should be periodically evaluated to ensure their continued effectiveness. While prerequisite programmes are usually associated with food safety, properly operating prerequisite programmes will also contribute to product quality. Reference should be made to the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) and relevant Codex codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice including the Guidelines for the Validation of Food Safety Control Measures for further information to assist with the design of the prerequisite programmes for a processing facility. In addition to the provisions of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) the following additional prerequisite provisions should apply: 3.1 ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES 3.1.1 Location Processing facilities should, to the extent possible, be located close to the source of raw materials so as to minimize changes that might lead to quality or safety concerns for raw materials of quick frozen foods prior to freezing. 3.1.2 Process Plant Design The food processing facility should be designed for the rapid processing, freezing and storage of food products. The processing facility should include a product flow that is designed to minimize process delays and prevent cross-contamination that could affect food quality and safety. 3.1.3 Cold Store Design The cold store walls, floor, ceiling, and doors should be properly insulated in order to help maintain appropriate product temperatures. It is important that the design of the cold store ensures that:  adequate refrigeration capacity provides and maintains a product temperature of -18°C or colder;  there is adequate air flow around the stored foods;  storage areas are provided with a capability to control and record temperatures on a regular basis;  loss of cold air and introduction of warm and humid air are avoided; and  leaks of any refrigerant are prevented. In case of a leak, immediate corrective action ought to be applied in order to eliminate the problem. 3.1.4 Equipment Design and Construction The equipment should be designed and constructed in such a manner that physical damage to the raw materials and product is minimized, e.g. by ensuring there are no sharp inside corners or projections and that physical, chemical or biological hazards are not introduced into the product. Freezers should be designed and constructed so that, when properly operated, they meet the requirements of a quick freezing process. -- 2 of 14 -- CXC 8 Page 3 of 14 3.1.5 Facilities In the case of power losses or equipment failure, a contingency plan should be in place in order to maintain the product temperature. 3.2 CONTROL OF OPERATION 3.2.1 Recall Procedures Recall procedures should be in place to ensure timely withdrawal of products that may pose a risk to human health. 3.2.1.1 Traceability/Product Tracing1 The traceability/product tracing system should be designed and implemented according to the Principles for Traceability/Product Tracing as a Tool within a Food Inspection and Certification System (CXG 60-2006), especially to enable the withdrawal of the product, where necessary. 3.3 ESTABLISHMENT: MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION 3.3.1 Maintenance Regimes Proper maintenance and repair of any damage to the cold store and its infrastructure (e.g. prevention of rust, water leaks, ice accumulation, etc.) should be ensured so that insulation and refrigeration performance is maintained. 3.4 TRAINING Staff should have the skills and knowledge appropriate to their work to ensure that safety and quality of foods is not adversely affected during handling. Staff should also be aware of the importance of maintaining temperature control for frozen foods to maintain the quality and safety of the foods. Training programs should be in place (either formal training courses or training provided whilst working) to ensure that staff have these skills and knowledge. 4. COLD CHAIN CONTROL As appropriate, both safety and quality aspects should be considered for each operation of the cold chain. With respect to food safety, a HACCP plan should be developed, as appropriate, for each operation in the cold chain. Cold chain control is also important with respect to food quality. Essential quality provisions2 can apply at various points in the processing and handling system. While control of essential quality provisions may be considered optional, control of food safety hazards through prerequisite programs and a HACCP plan should be used, as appropriate, to ensure safety. 4.1 RAW MATERIALS Raw materials used should be safe, sound and suitable for further processing. Procedures should be in place to ensure quality and safety of incoming materials. Freezing cannot improve quality, and it is necessary to use raw materials of optimum quality. Many raw materials and food products are highly perishable and should be handled carefully to maintain their quality until the freezing process is initiated. Initial microbial levels in raw materials to be frozen should be kept as low as possible, both for food safety and quality reasons. Temperatures and duration of storage should be appropriately and regularly controlled to minimize adverse microbial effects. Most quality deterioration, including the development of off odours and flavours and changes in colours and texture are due to microbial growth or enzymatic activity. 1 See Definitions for the Purposes of the Codex Alimentarius, Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 2 Essential quality provision is a provision which should be applied to ensure the specified quality of the product. -- 3 of 14 -- CXC 8 Page 4 of 14 Producers of quick frozen food should as far as practicable implement measures to control physical, biological and chemical hazards in raw materials to levels that do not present a threat to human health according to the recommendations of the relevant sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) and other relevant Codex texts. Appropriate procedures should be in place for sorting and segregating raw materials that are unsuitable for further processing. Raw materials for processing and quick freezing should be prepared without delay and appropriate temperature control should be applied in order to minimize possible microbiological, chemical or biochemical changes that might affect safety and quality. To minimize deterioration, raw materials should be cooled and stored under appropriate conditions (e.g. pre-cooling) or transported and frozen in the shortest time possible. For highly perishable products, product temperature control at receiving may be considered a critical control point (CCP)3. Additionally, the receipt temperature may also be considered an essential quality provision. 4.2 PROCESSING BEFORE FREEZING Raw materials may be processed in many ways before freezing, e.g. cleaning, sorting, cutting, slicing, blanching, conditioning, ageing, scalding, filleting and heating. Whether such processes should be regarded as CCPs depends on the type of raw materials and the actual conditions, especially on how much time the raw materials and the resulting product spend at temperatures that could result in pathogen growth. It is particularly important that the time spent in the critical temperature zone (i.e. between 10C and 60C) be as short as possible. Consideration should also be given to any of these processes as to whether or not they should be regarded as an essential quality provision. Blanching is often used in the production of frozen vegetables and other products to inactivate enzymes that would cause quality problems (taste, colour) during frozen storage. The blanching schedule should be determined to ensure the desired quality outcome, and may be an essential quality provision. If storage of intermediate ingredients (e.g. a quick frozen vegetable that is to be combined with other quick frozen vegetables or other ingredients into a final product) is necessary prior to further processing, the storage conditions, especially temperature, should be appropriate to the foodstuff concerned and if necessary, take into account future use or further processing of the food. The heat treatment of many pre-cooked foods, e.g. prepared meals, should be sufficient to ensure inactivation of pathogens of concern. In certain cases, based on the hazards and controls specified for an operation, the time-temperature treatment and subsequent cooling may be considered as CCPs. If frozen raw materials are used and a thawing process is included, the thawing method should be clearly defined and the thawing schedule (time and temperature parameters) should be carefully monitored. Selection of the thawing method should take into account the thickness and uniformity of size of the products in particular. Thawing should be done in such a manner that the growth of microorganisms is controlled. Thawing time and temperature parameters may be a CCP and/or an essential quality provision. 4.3 QUICK FREEZING PROCESS The quick freezing process should be performed in such a manner as to minimize physical, biochemical and microbiological changes, by taking into account the freezing system or process and its capacity, nature of the product (thermal conductivity, thickness, form, initial temperature) and volume of production. This is best achieved by ensuring that the product passes quickly through the temperature range of maximum ice crystallization. This temperature range varies among different types of products. The quick freezing process step may be considered an essential quality provision. During freezing operation it is important to provide spaces or channels permitting air circulation between the cartons or the pieces of food, respectively. This is especially the case when large lots of food are frozen or where the food consists of large pieces (e.g. whole turkeys). If such air channels are not provided, the mass of the food may be such that in spite of rapid air blast and low air temperatures, the inner parts of the lot chill and freeze slowly. It is important that the thermal centre of the product is chilled as quickly as possible to prevent the outgrowth of pathogenic microorganisms or the production of microbial toxins. Freezing may be a CCP. 3 See HACCP Annex to the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969). -- 4 of 14 -- CXC 8 Page 5 of 14 The quick freezing process should not be regarded as complete until and unless the product temperature has reached -18C or colder at the thermal centre, after the stabilization of the temperature. On exit from the freezing apparatus, the product should be moved to a cold store as quic