CXC 33-1985 Page 1 of 12 Revised 2011 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR COLLECTING, PROCESSING AND MARKETING OF NATURAL MINERAL WATERS (CXC 33-1985) INTRODUCTION 1. This Code recommends appropriate hygienic practices for collecting natural mineral waters, their treatment, bottling, packaging, storage, transport, distribution and sale for direct consumption, so as to guarantee a safe, healthy and wholesome product. These hygienic practices are particularly important, because some hygiene control measures usually applied to bottled waters cannot be used for natural mineral waters. 1. SECTION I – OBJECTIVES 2. The Code of hygienic practice for collecting, processing and marketing of natural mineral waters  Identifies the necessary requirements that have to be fulfilled in order to ensure the distribution of natural mineral waters that are safe and suitable for human consumption.  Recommends an approach based on the principles of the Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (abbreviated in this document as General Principles of Food Hygiene).  Recommends conducting a specific hazard analysis in the overall context of the application of principles such as HACCP to the production of natural mineral waters.  Provides guidance containing conditions specifically linked to natural mineral waters. 2. SECTION II – SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITION 2.1 SCOPE 3. This Code applies to all packaged natural mineral waters offered for sale as food. It does not apply to natural mineral waters sold or used for other purposes. 2.2 USE OF THE DOCUMENT 4. This Code is supplemental to and should be used in conjunction with the General Principles of Food Hygiene. 5. In many instances, the control measures are articulated in a general manner in the General Principles of Food Hygiene as part of the general strategy for food safety. In providing this Code, it is assumed that the General Principles of Food Hygiene are implemented. 6. The use of this Code may require modifications and amendments that take into account such factors as regional differences due to specific environmental and hydro-geological conditions. 2.3 DEFINITIONS 7. For the purpose of this Code, definitions contained in the General Principles of Food Hygiene apply. 8. In addition, the following definitions also apply: Natural mineral waters - all waters meeting the definitions in Section 2 of the Codex Standard for Natural Mineral Waters (CODEX STAN 108 - 1981). Adequate - sufficient to accomplish the intended purpose of this Code. Aquifer - a saturated geological unit below the surface that yields water in sufficient quantities under normal hydraulic conditions. Watershed- the surface area upstream of the ground water resource within which precipitations can either directly or indirectly enter the ground water system and which can contribute to recharge the aquifer. -- 1 of 12 -- CXC 33-1985 Page 2 of 12 Containers - any vessels made from food-grade packaging material intended to be filled with natural mineral waters. Ground water - Waters such as spring water, artesian water, and well water originating from subsurface aquifers. Ground waters may be classified broadly as protected or unprotected ground water. Protected ground waters are not directly influenced by surface water or the surface environment. Handling of natural mineral waters - any manipulation with regard to collecting, treating, filling, packaging, storing, distribution and sale of natural mineral waters. Packaging material – any materials, food grade or not, e.g. foil, film, metal, paper, wax-paper, etc. Perimeter of protection / protection zone - area where human and animal activities need to be monitored and managed to protect the water from contamination. Pests – any animals capable of directly or indirectly contaminating natural mineral waters. Recharge – The process by which water enters an underground aquifer through faults, fractures or direct absorption. Recharge rate – The quantity of water per unit of time that replenishes or refills an aquifer. Reservoir - For the purposes of this document a reservoir is a holding tank. Safe yield – Sustainable quantity of water per unit of time that may flow from a spring or be pumped continuously from a well or a borehole without depleting that resource beyond its ability to be replenished naturally. Spring - An underground formation from which natural mineral waters discharge naturally from the ground. 3. SECTION III - PRIMARY PRODUCTION 9. Refer to Section III of the General Principles of Food Hygiene. 3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL HYGIENE - Protection of aquifers 3.1.1 AUTHORIZATION 10. Any spring, well or drilling intended for the collection of natural mineral waters should be approved by the official authority having jurisdiction. 3.1.2 DETERMINATION OF THE GENESIS OF THE NATURAL MINERAL WATERS 11. As far as it is methodologically possible in each case, a precise analysis should be carried out on the origin of natural mineral waters, the period of their residence in the ground before being collected and their chemical and physical qualities. 3.1.3 PERIMETER OF PROTECTION 12. Areas, wherein natural mineral waters might be contaminated or their chemical, physical, radiological and microbiological qualities otherwise deteriorated, should be determined. Where indicated by hydro- geological conditions and considering the risks of contamination several perimeters with separate dimensions may be provided for. 13. Hydro-geological studies by qualified experts should be carried out to determine and to describe the watershed. 14. Hydro-geological studies should include:  Location of the extraction points  Determination of the extent and properties of the aquifer containing the ground water resource  Location and extent of the watershed  Degree and nature of natural protection against contamination  Surface water features, identifying those interacting with the ground water resource -- 2 of 12 -- CXC 33-1985 Page 3 of 12  Other water abstractors, identifying those exploiting the same ground water resource  Chemistry and quality of the ground water resource  Determination of the ground water recharge rate and safe yield  Travel times for ground water between recharge zone and extraction point(s) 3.1.4 PROTECTIVE MEASURES 15. All possible precautions should be taken within the perimeter of protection to avoid any contamination of, or external influence on, the chemical, physical, radiological and microbiological qualities of natural mineral waters. It is recommended that regulations be established for the disposal of liquid, solid or gaseous waste, the use of substances that might deteriorate natural mineral waters (e.g. by agriculture) as well as for any possibility of accidental deterioration of natural mineral waters by natural occurrences such as a change in the hydro-geological conditions. Consideration should be given to the following potential contaminants: bacteria, viruses, protozoa, fertilizers, hydrocarbons, detergents, pesticides, phenolic compounds, toxic metals, radioactive substances and other soluble organic or inorganic substances. Even where nature provides apparently sufficient protection against surface contamination, activities particularly likely to result in contamination, such as mining, construction, etc., should be taken into consideration. 16. An evaluation of the adverse impacts of potential threats to the quantity and quality of the water supply should be performed. The evaluation should normally include:  Review of land ownership and land use (current and historic) for the perimeter of protection;  Collection of data on contaminants, contamination incidents and legal controls applicable to protecting waters from contamination;  Evaluation for each land use or activity. 17. Protection zones and monitoring programmes should be defined using the finding of the evaluation. At a minimum, the protection zone should encompass property owned by the producer, but as much as reasonably possible extend to other areas not under their control. Different levels of protection are required depending on proximity to the water source and potential risks. 3.2 HYGIENIC EXTRACTION AND COLLECTION OF NATURAL MINERAL WATERS 3.2.1 EXTRACTION 18. The extraction of natural mineral waters (from springs, natural or drilled wells) should be performed in conformity with the hydro-geological conditions in such a manner as to prevent any water other than the natural mineral waters from entering or, should there be pumping facilities, prevent any extraneous water from entering by reducing the supply. The natural mineral waters thus collected or pumped should be protected in such a way that they will be safe from contamination whether caused by natural occurrence or actions or neglect or ill will. 19. The extraction facilities should be managed to prevent any other water, such as flood water or shallow seepage, from entering. It should also be managed in a hygienic manner to prevent any natural or manmade contamination. 3.2.2 PROTECTION OF THE EXTRACTION AREA 20. In the immediate surroundings of springs and wells, precautionary measures should be taken to ensure that contaminants cannot enter the extraction area. The extraction area should be inaccessible to non authorized persons by providing adequate devices (e.g. enclosure). Any activity not aiming at the collection of natural mineral waters should not be allowed in this area. 21. Roadways, areas used by wheeled traffic and areas serving the establishment which are within its boundaries or in its immediate vicinity should have a hard paved surface suitable for wheeled traffic. There should be adequate drainage and provision should be made for the protection of the extraction area, where appropriate. Adequate road signage may be provided to call the attention of road users to the existence of a natural mineral waters extraction area. 3.2.3 EQUIPMENT AND RESERVOIRS -- 3 of 12 -- CXC 33-1985 Page 4 of 12 22. Equipment used for extraction of natural mineral waters and reservoirs should be designed and constructed in order to avoid contamination of natural mineral waters and to maintain their original characteristics. 23. The pipes, pumps or other possible devices coming into contact with natural mineral waters and used for its collection should be made of inert material as to ensure that the original characteristics and qualities of natural mineral waters will not be changed. 3.2.4 EXPLOITATION OF NATURAL MINERAL WATERS, MONITORING 24. The condition of the extraction facilities, areas of extraction and perimeters of protection as well as the quality of the natural mineral waters should periodically be examined. To monitor the stability of the chemical and physical parameters of the natural mineral waters, allowing for natural variations, automatic or manual measurements of the typical characteristics should be carried out and documented. 25. Periodic monitoring should include the following basic parameters:  Appearance, odour and taste  Physical: flow rate, temperature, electrical conductivity, piezometric level  Physico-chemical: pH  Chemical: according to water characteristics, content of carbon dioxide 26. Microbiological monitoring at the source should meet the criteria of the Table in Annex I of this document and should be performed at a frequency that enables the appropriate hygienic management. 27. Should there be a failure to meet the limits of the established criteria, the necessary corrective measures are immediately to be taken and recorded. 3.3 HANDLING AND STORAGE OF NATURAL MINERAL WATERS INTENDED FOR PACKAGING 3.3.1 TECHNICAL ASPECTS 28. Methods and procedures for maintaining the handling and storage facilities should be hygienic and not be a potential health hazard to humans or a source of contamination to natural mineral waters. From the hygiene standpoint, servicing of the handling and storage installations should meet the same standards as those required for the packaging or treatment. 3.3.2 STORAGE AT THE POINT OF EXTRACTION 29. The quantity of natural mineral waters stored at the point of extraction should be as low as possible. The storing should furthermore ensure protection against contamination or deterioration. 30. Water should be stored for a time as short as possible, in order to minimise potential for contamination and to avoid stagnant water. The design and operation of the reservoirs should restrict the time from point of extraction to packaging to a minimum. The reservoir should be enclosed to protect water from environmental contamination. Air entering the headspace of reservoirs should be filtered or treated to prevent contamination of the water. Air filters should have a pore size of 0.45 μm or less. 3.3.3 PIPING AND RESERVOIRS 31. Any piping or reservoir used in the processing of natural mineral waters from its source to the packaging facilities, the latter included, should comply with the necessary requirements set by the official authority having jurisdiction and be made of inert material approved for food contact such as ceramic and stainless steel that prevents any deterioration, be it by water, handling, servicing or disinfection. 3.4 CLEANING, MAINTENANCE AND PERSONNEL HYGIENE AT PRIMARY PRODUCTION 32. The water extraction and supply network should be properly managed and maintained, and cleaned or disinfected to protect all components from risk of chemical, physical and microbiological contamination. For the extraction facilities itself, the disinfection regime should be designed to take account of the risks and its operational regime. For example, a constantly flowing spring may require sanitation only at times of intervention. -- 4 of 12 -- CXC 33-1985 Page 5 of 12 33. A detailed contingency plan should also be developed in collaboration with appropriate experts and authorities in order to react as quickly as possible to exceptional events (e.g. contamination of the groundwater resource, earthquake, forest fires, as appropriate for the specific location) so that consequences can be minimised. This plan should be part of the global crisis management system of the operating company. 34. Any reservoir should be properly cleaned and if necessary disinfected and kept in good condition so as to not present any potential for contamination to natural mineral waters and of modification of the original characteristics of natural mineral waters. 4. SECTION IV - ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES 35. Refer to Section IV of the General Principles of Food Hygiene. 4.1 LOCATION 36. Refer to General Principles of Food Hygiene. 4.2 PREMISES AND ROOMS 37. The filling equipment (rinser, filler, capper) should be protected by a cabinet under positive pressure filtered air or in a room under sterile air filtration with positive pressure. It is advised to restrict operations in this particular area to a minimum by confining it to the open container activities of ri