CODE OF PRACTICE TO MINIMIZE AND CONTAIN FOODBORNE ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE CXC 61-2005 Adopted in 2005. Amended in 2021. -- 1 of 14 -- CXC 61-2005 2 1. INTRODUCTION Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses an important, complex, and priority global public health challenge. Along the food chain, there is a need to address the risks associated with development, selection and dissemination of foodborne resistant microorganisms and resistance determinants. Responsible and prudent use of antimicrobial agents in all sectors following a One Health approach and strategies for best management practices in animal production (terrestrial and aquatic), plant/crop production and food/feed processing, packaging, storage, transport, and wholesale and retail distribution should form a key part of multisectoral national action plans to address risks of foodborne AMR. This code of practice addresses the responsible and prudent use of antimicrobial agents by participants in the food chain, including, but not limited to, the role of competent authorities, the pharmaceutical industry, veterinarians, and plant/crop health professionals, and food producers and processors. It provides guidance on measures and practices at primary production, and during processing, storage, transport, wholesale and retail distribution of food to prevent, minimize and contain foodborne AMR in the food supply. It also identifies knowledge gaps and provides guidance on communication strategies to consumers. In keeping with the Codex mandate, this code of practice addresses antimicrobial use along the food chain. It is recognized that the use of antimicrobial agents along the food chain may result in exposure to antimicrobial resistant bacteria or their determinants in the food production environment. As part of a One Health approach to minimize and contain foodborne AMR, only authorized products should be used and best practices in the food production sector should be followed to minimize the occurrence/persistence in the food production environment of antimicrobials and their metabolites from food production related activities, and to minimize the risks associated with the selection and dissemination of resistant microorganisms and resistance determinants in the food production environment. This code of practice is an integral part of risk analysis focusing on risk management options and should be read in conjunction with other Codex texts including the Guidelines on Integrated Monitoring and Surveillance of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 94-2021) and the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011). In addition, the Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 53-2003), the Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CXC 54-2004), and the Guidelines for the Design and Implementation of National Regulatory Food Safety Assurance Programmes associated with the Use of Veterinary Drugs in Food Producing Animals (CXG 71-2009) are particularly relevant for use of agricultural chemicals on plants/crops, animal feed, and veterinary drugs, respectively. This code of practice provides risk management advice, including the responsible and prudent use of antimicrobial agents that can be applied proportionately to the risks identified through the risk analysis process described in the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011). Risk managers are responsible for prioritizing and assessing foodborne AMR risks appropriate to the country and determining how best to reduce risk and protect public health. The Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CXG 63-2007) contains guidance for developing and implementing risk management measures. Setting priorities and identifying risk management measures should take into account the following:  WHO Guidance on Integrated Surveillance of Antimicrobial Resistance in Foodborne Bacteria, Application of a One Health Approach;  WHO List of Critically Important Antimicrobials for Human Medicine, specifically the Annex with the complete list of antimicrobials for human use, categorized as critically important, highly important and important;  relevant chapters of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code and the OIE Aquatic Animal Health Code and the OIE List of Antimicrobial Agents of Veterinary Importance; and  national lists of important antimicrobials for humans and animals where they exist. Where available, national and local guidelines to prevent, minimize and contain foodborne AMR should be taken into consideration. Best management practices and guidelines on the responsible and prudent use of antimicrobials developed by governmental and professional organizations should also be considered. This document is designed to provide a framework, for the development of measures to mitigate the risk of foodborne AMR that countries may implement, as part of their national strategy on AMR, in accordance with their capabilities, based on their national priorities and capacities, and within a reasonable period of time. A progressive implementation may be used by some countries to properly apply elements in this document proportionate to the foodborne AMR risk and should not be used to generate unjustified barriers to trade. -- 2 of 14 -- CXC 61-2005 3 2. SCOPE This code of practice provides risk management guidance to address the risk to human health of the development and transmission of antimicrobial resistant microorganisms or resistance determinants through food. It provides risk-based guidance on relevant measures and practices along the food chain to minimize and contain the development and spread of foodborne AMR, including guidance on the responsible and prudent use of antimicrobial agents in animal production (terrestrial and aquatic) plant/crop production, and references other best management practices, as appropriate. This document includes guidance for all interested parties involved in the authorization, manufacture, sale and supply, prescription and use of antimicrobial agents in the food chain together with those involved in the handling, preparation, food processing, storage, transport, wholesale and retail distribution and consumption of food who have a role to play in ensuring the responsible and prudent use of antimicrobial agents and/or who have a role with limiting the development and spread of foodborne antimicrobial resistant microorganisms and resistance determinants. Most of the recommendations in this code of practice focus on antibacterials, however some recommendations may also be applicable to antiviral, antiparasitic, antiprotozoal, and antifungal agents, where there is scientific evidence of foodborne AMR risk to human health. As there are existing Codex or internationally recognized guidelines, the following areas related to antimicrobial agents or AMR are outside the scope of this document: residues of antimicrobial agents in food; AMR marker genes in recombinant DNA plants/crops1 and recombinant DNA microorganisms,2 non-genetically modified microorganisms (for example, starter cultures) intentionally added to food with a technological purpose; certain food ingredients, which could potentially carry AMR determinants, such as probiotics;3 and biocides. In addition, AMR from non-food animals, non-food plants/crops, or non-food routes are also outside the scope of this document. 3. DEFINITIONS The relevant definitions presented in the Codex Procedural Manual, Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011), General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969), Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CXG 30-1999) and Guidelines on Integrated Monitoring and Surveillance of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 94-2021) are applicable to this document. The following definitions are included to establish a common understanding of the terms used in this document: Antibacterial: A substance that acts against bacteria. Antimicrobial agent: Any substance of natural, semi-synthetic, or synthetic origin that at in vivo concentrations kills or inhibits the growth of microorganisms by interacting with a specific target. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR): The ability of a microorganism to multiply or persist in the presence of an increased level of an antimicrobial agent relative to the susceptible counterpart of the same species. Antimicrobial resistance determinant: The genetic element(s) encoding for the ability of microorganisms to withstand the effects of an antimicrobial agent. They are located either chromosomally or extra-chromosomally and may be associated with mobile genetic elements such as plasmids, integrons or transposons, thereby enabling horizontal transmission from resistant to susceptible strains. Control of disease/metaphylaxis: Administration or application of antimicrobial agents to a group of plants/crops or animals containing sick and healthy individuals (presumed to be infected), to minimize or resolve clinical signs and to prevent further spread of the disease. Extra- or off-label use: The use of an antimicrobial agent that is not in accordance with the approved product labelling. Food chain: Production to consumption continuum including, primary production (food-producing animals, plants/crops, feed), harvest/slaughter, packing, processing, storage, transport, and distribution to the point of consumption. 1 The food safety assessment on the use of antimicrobial resistance marker genes in recombinant-DNA plants is addressed in the Guidelines for the Conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods derived from Recombinant-DNA Plants (CXG 45-2003). 2 The food safety assessment on the use of antimicrobial resistance marker genes in recombinant-DNA microorganisms is addressed in the Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods produced using Recombinant-DNA Microorganisms (CXG 46-2003). 3 The food safety assessment on the use of probiotics in foods is addressed in the Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Working Group on drafting Guidelines for the Evaluation of Probiotics in Foods (FAO/WHO, 2002). -- 3 of 14 -- CXC 61-2005 4 Food-producing animals: Animals raised for the purpose of providing food to humans. Food production environment: The immediate vicinity of the food chain where there is relevant evidence that it could contribute to foodborne AMR. Growth promotion: Administration of antimicrobial agents to only increase the rate of weight gain and/or the efficiency of feed utilization in animals. The term does not apply to the use of antimicrobials for the specific purpose of treating, controlling, or preventing infectious diseases. Marketing authorization: Process of reviewing and assessing a dossier to support an antimicrobial agent to determine whether to permit its marketing (also called licensing, registration, approval, etc.), finalized by granting of a document also called marketing authorization (equivalent: product licence). Medically important antimicrobials: Antimicrobial agents important for therapeutic use in humans, taking into account the WHO List of Critically Important Antimicrobials for Human Medicine, including the classes described in the Annex of the “List of Medically Important Antimicrobials, categorized as Critically Important, Highly Important, and Important”, or equivalent criteria established in a national list, where available. It does not include ionophores or other agents determined not to be a foodborne AMR risk consistent with the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011). One Health approach: A collaborative, multisectoral, and trans-disciplinary approach working with the goal of achieving optimal health outcomes recognizing the interconnection between humans, animals, plants/crops, and their shared environment. Pharmacovigilance: The collection and analysis of data on how products perform in the field after authorization and any interventions to ensure that they continue to be safe and effective. These data can include information on adverse effects to humans, animals, plants or the environment; or lack of efficacy. Plants/crops: A plant or crop that is cultivated or harvested as food or feed. Plant/crop health professional: An individual with professional or technical training, knowledge and experience in plant/crop health and protection practices. Prevention of disease/prophylaxis: Administration or application of antimicrobial agents to an individual or a group of plants/crops or animals at risk of acquiring a specific infection or in a specific situation where infectious disease is likely to occur if the antimicrobial agent is not administered or applied. Veterinary medical use4 5/phytosanitary use6 (food-producing animals or plants/crops): Administration or application of antimicrobial agents for the treatment, control/metaphylaxis or prevention/prophylaxis of disease. Treatment of disease: Administration or application of antimicrobial agents to an individual or group of plants/crops or animals showing clinical signs of infectious disease. 4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES TO MINIMIZE AND CONTAIN FOODBORNE ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE Principles on AMR risk management (generally) Principle 1: A One Health approach should be applied, wherever possible and applicable, when identifying, evaluating, selecting, and implementing foodborne AMR risk management options. Principle 2: Considering that this document is to provide risk management guidance to address foodborne AMR risks to human health, for animal health and plant health aspects, relevant OIE and IPPC standards should be considered. Principle 3: Foodborne AMR risk management measures should be implemented in a way that is proportionate to the risk and reviewed on a regular basis as described in the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011). Risk managers should consider potential unintended consequences to humans, animal, and plant health of recommended risk management measures. Principle 4: The WHO List of Critically Important Antimicrobials for Human Medicine, the OIE List of Antimicrobial Agents of Veterinary Importance, or national lists, where available, should be considered when setting priorities for risk assessment and risk management to minimize and contain AMR. The lists should be regularly reviewed and updated as necessary when supported by scientific findings as new scientific data emerges on resistance patterns. 4 See also OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code, specifically the chapter on Monitoring of the quantities and usage patterns of antimicrobial agents used in food-producing animals. 5 Also recognized as therapeutic use in some jurisdictions/organizations. 6 See also IPPC International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures, Glossary of Phytosanitary Terms. -- 4 of 14 -- CXC 61-2005 5 Principle 5: On a continuous and progressive implementat