CAC/RCP 3-1969 Page 1 of 6 Adopted 1969. Editorial amendments 2011. CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR DRIED FRUITS (CAC/RCP 3-1969) SECTION I - SCOPE This code of practice applies to all fruits that have been dried by natural or artificial means or a combination of both. The fruit is dried to the extent that the greater part of the moisture has been removed, and in addition the fruit may be subjected to a safe and appropriate treatment in preparation and packing, to permit marketing in normal trade channels. Fruits covered by this code include apples, apricots, peaches, pears, nectarines, prunes, figs, dates, and vine fruits such as raisins and currants. Fruits other than vine fruits prior to drying, if desired, and applicable for the particular fruit, may be cored, or pitted, sliced, diced, quartered, halved, or otherwise subdivided. This code does not apply to fruits commonly known as "dehydrated fruits" with a moisture content not exceeding 5%. SECTION II - DEFINITIONS None considered necessary for this code of practice. SECTION III - RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS A. Environmental Sanitation in Growing and Food Production Areas (1) Sanitary disposal of human and animal wastes. Adequate precaution should be taken to ensure that human and animal wastes are disposed of in such a manner as not to constitute a public health or hygienic hazard and extreme care should be taken to protect the fruit from contamination with these wastes. (2) Sanitary quality of irrigation water. Water used for irrigation should not constitute a public health hazard to the consumer through the fruit. (3) Animal, plant pest and disease control. Growing areas should be kept free from rotten or decomposing fruit that is attractive to insects, rodents and birds. Where control measures are undertaken, treatment with chemical, biological or physical agents should be done only in accordance with the recommendations of the appropriate official agency, by or under the direct supervision of personnel with a thorough understanding of the hazards involved, including the possibility of toxic residues being retained by the fruit. B. Sanitary Harvesting and Food Production (1) Equipment and product containers. Equipment and product containers should not constitute a hazard to health. Containers which are reused should be of such material and construction as will facilitate thorough cleaning, and should be so cleaned and maintained as not to constitute a source of contamination to the fruit. (2) Sanitary techniques. Harvesting and production operations, methods and procedures should be clean and sanitary. (3) Removal of obviously unfit materials. Unfit products should be segregated during harvesting and production to the fullest extent practicable and should be disposed of in an appropriate manner. The harvested fruit should be examined by competent persons to ensure that it is fit for further processing into food. (4) Protection of product from contamination. Suitable precautions should be taken to prevent the raw fruit from being contaminated by animals, insects, vermin, birds, chemical or microbiological contaminants or other objectionable substances during handling and storage. The nature of the fruit and the methods of harvesting will indicate the type and degree of protection required. The raw or dried fruit should be moved to suitable storage, or to the processing area for immediate processing, as -- 1 of 6 -- CAC/RCP 3-1969 Page 2 of 6 soon as possible after harvesting or drying. Where fruits are likely to have become infested with insects or mites during or after harvesting or drying as a preventive measure, suitable treatment such as fumigation should be applied. Fruit held for processing should be stored in closed containers, buildings, or under suitable type of covering that protects it from rodents, insects, birds, debris and dust. Fumigation methods and chemicals used should be approved by legal authorities having jurisdiction. (5) Drying yards. Where fruit is dried by the sun in drying yards, such yards should be recognized as food processing yards whether drying is carried out on a grower's property or as a commercial operation. Such yards should as far as possible comply with such of the provisions of Section IV of this code as are applicable, and in particular with the following requirements. (a) Location. Drying yards should in all cases be located a sufficient distance from cattle feed lots, settling pods and/or other waste collection areas to prevent contamination from these sources. They should also be so located that they have proper and adequate drainage. (b) Construction. The drying yard should be so surfaced that it will permit maintenance of clean yard surfaces and prevent contamination of drying fruit. The drying yard should be fenced, where necessary, to keep out animals as far as practicable, and the area around the drying yard should be kept clean, free from weeds and other debris that can blow into the yard. Cutting sheds in which fruit is pitted, cut or otherwise prepared and spread on trays for drying should preferably be closed buildings with screened windows that do not permit access by rodents, insects, or birds. Where cutting is done in open sheds, adequate precautions should be taken to protect against insect, rodent and bird contamination or harbourage. The sheds should be adequately lit and ventilated, and adequate, clean toilet and hand-washing facilities should be provided. Both fresh fruit for processing and the dried fruit should be stored in areas where it is protected from rodent, insect and bird depredations, and storage time should be kept to a minimum consistent with good manufacturing practice. There should be an adequate supply of clean potable water for hand-washing, equipment cleaning, and raw product washing. Standards of potability shall not be less than those contained in the "International Standards for Drinking Water", World Health Organization, 1971. (c) Hygienic operating requirements. Drying trays, cutting equipment, and storage bins should be kept clean and free from fruit residue and foreign substances that may cause contamination of the fruit. C. Transportation (1) Facilities. Conveyance for transporting the harvested crop or raw product from the production area, place of harvest or storage should be adequate for the purpose intended and should be of such material and construction as will permit thorough cleaning and should be so cleaned and maintained as not to constitute a source of contamination to the fruit. (2) Handling procedures. All handling procedures should be such as will prevent the product from being contaminated. Extreme care should be taken in transporting perishable products to prevent spoilage or deterioration. Special equipment - such as refrigeration equipment - should be used if the nature of the product or distances involved so indicate. If ice is used in contact with the fruit, it should be of sanitary quality as required in Section IV - A (2c). SECTION IV - PLANT FACILITIES AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS A. Plant Construction and Layout (1) Location, size and sanitary design. The building and surrounding area should be such as can be kept reasonably free of objectionable odours, smoke, dust, or other contamination; should be of sufficient size for the purpose intended without crowding of equipment or personnel; should be of sound construction and kept in good repair; should be of such construction as to protect against the entrance or harbouring of insects or birds or vermin; and should be so designed as to permit easy and adequate cleaning. In areas experiencing high concentrations of air-borne pollutants, equipment should be used to remove pollutants from the air blown across or through the product. -- 2 of 6 -- CAC/RCP 3-1969 Page 3 of 6 (2) Sanitary facilities and controls (a) Separation of processes. Areas where raw materials are received or stored should be so separated from areas in which final product preparation or packaging is conducted as to preclude contamination of the finished product. Areas and compartments used for storage, manufacture or handling of edible products should be separate and distinct from those used for inedible materials. The food handling area should be completely separated from any part of the premises used as living quarters. (b) Water supply. An ample supply of cold water should be available and an adequate supply of hot water where necessary. The water supply should be of potable quality. Standards of potability shall not be less than those contained in the "International Standards for Drinking Water", World Health Organization, 1971. (c) Ice. Ice should be made from water of potable quality and should be manufactured, handled, stored and used, so as to protect it from contamination. (d) Auxiliary water supply. Where non-potable water is used - for such purposes as fire control - it must be carried in completely separate lines, identified preferably by colour and with no cross- connection or back-siphonage with the lines carrying potable water. (e) Plumbing and waste disposal. All plumbing and waste disposal lines (including sewer systems) must be large enough to carry peak loads. All lines must be water-tight and have adequate traps and vents. Disposal of waste should be effected in such a manner as not to permit contamination of potable water supplies. The plumbing and the manner of waste disposal should be approved by the official agency having jurisdiction. (f) Lighting and ventilation. Premises should be well lit and ventilated. Special attention should be given to the venting of areas and equipment producing excessive heat, steam, obnoxious fumes or vapours, or contaminating aerosols. Good ventilation is important to prevent both condensation (which may drip into the product) and mould growth in overhead structures - which growth may fall into the food. Light bulbs and fixtures suspended over food in any step of preparation should be of the safety type or otherwise protected to prevent food contamination in the case of breakage. (g) Toilet-rooms and facilities. Adequate and convenient toilets should be provided and toilet areas should be equipped with self-closing doors. Toilet rooms should be well lit and ventilated and should not open directly into a food handling area. They should be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. There should be associated hand-washing facilities within the toilet area and the notices should be posted requiring personnel to wash their hands after using the toilet. (h) Hand-washing facilities. Adequate and convenient facilities for employees to wash and dry their hands should be provided wherever the process demands. They should be in full view of the processing floor. Single-use towels are recommended, where practicable, but otherwise the method of drying should be approved by the official agency having jurisdiction. The facilities should be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. B. Equipment and Utensils (1) Materials. All food contact surfaces should be smooth; free from pits, crevices and loose scale; non- toxic; unaffected by food products; and capable of withstanding repeated exposure to normal cleaning; and non-absorbent unless the nature of a particular and otherwise acceptable process renders the use of a surface, such as wood, necessary. (2) Sanitary design, construction and installation. Equipment and utensils should be so designed and constructed as will prevent hygienic hazards and permit easy and thorough cleaning. Stationary equipment should be installed in such a manner as will permit easy and thorough cleaning. (3) Equipment and Utensils. Equipment and utensils used for inedible or contaminating materials should be so identified and should not be used for handling edible products. 4) Drying equipment. Equipment used for drying should be so constructed and operated that the product cannot be adversely affected by the drying medium. C. Hygienic Operating Requirements -- 3 of 6 -- CAC/RCP 3-1969 Page 4 of 6 While additional and more specific requirements may be established for certain products, the following should apply as minimal in all food production, handling, storage and distribution: (1) Sanitary maintenance of plant, facilities and premises. The building, equipment, utensils and all other physical facilities of the plant should be kept in good repair and should be kept clean and maintained in an orderly, sanitary condition. Waste materials should be frequently removed from the working area during plant operation and adequate waste receptacles should be provided. Detergents and disinfectants employed should be appropriate to the purpose and should be so used as to present no hazard to public health. (2) Vermin Control. Effective measures should be taken to protect against the entrance into the premises and the harbourage on the premises of insects, rodents, birds or other vermin. (3) Exclusion of domestic animals. Dogs, cats and other domestic animals, should be excluded from areas where food is processed or stored. (4) Personnel health. Plant management should advise personnel that any person afflicted with infected wounds, sores, or any illness, notably diarrhoea, should immediately report to management. Management should take care to ensure that no person, while known to be affected with a disease capable of being transmitted through food, or known to be a carrier of such disease microorganisms, or while afflicted with infected wounds, sores, or any illness, is permitted to work in any area of a food plant in a capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food or food contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms. (5) Toxic substances. All rodenticides, fumigants, insecticides or other toxic substances should be stored in separate locked rooms or cabinets and handled only by properly trained personnel. They should be used only by or under the direct supervision of personnel with a thorough understanding of the hazards involved, including the possibility of contamination of the product. (6) Personnel hygiene and food handling practices (a) All persons working in a food plant should maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness while on duty. Clothing including suitable headdress should be appropriate to the duties being performed and should be kept clean. (b) Hands should be washed as often as necessary to conform to hygienic operating practices. (c) Spitting, eating and the use of tobacco or chewing gum should be prohibited in food handling areas. (d) All necessary precautions should be taken to prevent the contamination of the food product or ingredients with any foreign substance. (e) Minor cuts and abrasions on the hands should be appropriately treated and covered with a suitable waterproof dressing. Adequate first-aid facilities should be provided to meet these contingencies so that there is no contamination of the food. (f) Gloves used in food handli