CXC 44-1995 Page 1 of 8 Amended 2004. CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PACKAGING AND TRANSPORT OF FRESH FRUIT AND VEGETABLES (CXC 44-1995) - SECTION I - SCOPE 1.1 This code recommends proper packaging and transport of fresh fruit and vegetables in order to maintain produce quality during transportation and marketing. - SECTION II - DESIGN, CONDITION AND LOADING METHOD OF TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT 2.1 Mode of transportation and type of equipment Factors include: - destination; - value of the produce; - degree of produce perishability; - amount of produce to be transported; - recommended storage temperature and relative humidity; - outside temperature conditions at origin and destination points; - time in transit to reach destination by air, land, or ocean transport; - freight rates negotiated with the carriers; - quality of transportation service. 2.2 Reliability and quality of transportation service provided by different carriers must be carefully considered along with the rates charged. Services and schedules are established or modified weekly. Sometimes service is abruptly withdrawn. Shippers should contact air and ocean port authorities at their origin and destination locations to receive the most current information on available services. Local trade publications also are excellent sources of information, as many carriers and their agents advertise their schedules and destinations. 2.3 When available refrigerated trailers and van containers are recommended for most high volume produce with transit and storage lives of a week or more. After transit, there must be enough remaining produce life for marketing. Carriers utilizing trailers and containers can offer a door-to-door service. This reduces handling, exposure, damage, and theft of the produce. 2.4 Air cargo containers also can be used to provide a door-to-door service. Produce transported by air is generally high-value and highly perishable. Freight costs are higher by air. Transit times, however, are in terms of hours instead of days. 2.5 Many produce is shipped in unrefrigerated air containers or on air cargo pallets. This requires close coordination at the origin and destination airports to protect the produce when flights are delayed. Temperature-controlled storage facilities at airports are needed to ensure produce quality. Refrigerated air containers are available and should be used when possible. Use of insulated thermal blankets is an option. 2.6 Produce which can be shipped in refrigerated trailers and van containers are sometimes shipped by air to take advantage of brief market opportunities, such as the beginning of a season when prices are high and supply is limited. A robust and accurate system for monitoring or displaying temperature and relative humidity during transport in integral containers needs to be considered. -- 1 of 8 -- CXC 44-1995 Page 2 of 8 2.7 Long distance transportation through tropical and frigid climates requires rugged well-designed equipment to withstand the transit environment and protect the produce. Desirable features in refrigerated trailers up to 14.6 m (48 ft) long and van containers up to 12 m (40 ft) long include for example: - 42000 kJ/h (40000 BTU/h) refrigeration capacity at 38oC (100oF) ambient, 2oC (36oF) return air temperature; - a continuously operating high capacity evaporator blower for more even produce temperatures and higher relative humidities; - a solid return air bulkhead at the front of the trailer to ensure air circulation throughout the load; - vertical ribs on the rear door to assist in air circulation; - adequate insulation and provisions for heating, when used in regions where weather conditions so demand due to the nature of the produce; - deep floor grooves or channels, from 50 to 75 mm (2 to 3 mm) in depth to provide an adequate cross-sectional area for air circulation under loads placed directly on the floor; - supply-air temperature sensing of the operation of the refrigeration unit to reduce produce chilling and freezing injury; - provisions for ventilation to prevent ethylene or carbon dioxide buildup; - air-ride suspension to reduce the amount of shock and vibration transferred to the shipping containers and the produce inside; - modern containers in which cold air leaves the front part of the container, but the air flow circulates from below (close to the floor) toward the back, then rising to the upper part of the container. 2.8 Most carriers check their transport equipment before presenting it to the shipper for loading. The condition of the equipment is critical to maintaining the quality of the produce. Therefore, the shipper also should check the equipment to ensure it is in good working order and meets the needs of the produce. Carriers provide guidance on checking and operating the refrigeration systems. 2.9 All transportation equipment should be checked for: - cleanliness - the load compartment should be regularly cleaned for example by steam cleaning; - damage to walls, floors, doors, ceilings should be in good condition; - temperature control - refrigerated units should be recently calibrated and supply continuous air circulation for uniform produce temperatures. 2.10 Shippers should insist on clean equipment. A load of produce can be ruined by: - smell from previous deliveries or incompatible loads; - toxic chemical residues; - insects nesting in the equipment; - decaying remains of agricultural produce; - debris blocking drain openings or air circulation channels along the floor. 2.11 Shippers should insist on well maintained equipment and check for the following: - damage to walls, ceilings, or floors which can let in the outside heat, cold, moisture, dirt, and insects; - operation and condition of doors, ventilation openings, and seals; - provisions for load locking and bracing. 2.12 For refrigerated trailers and van containers, the following additional checks are important: -- 2 of 8 -- CXC 44-1995 Page 3 of 8 - with the doors closed, have someone inside the cargo area check for light--door gaskets must seal. A smoke generator also can be used to detect leaks; - the refrigeration unit should cycle from high to low speed when the desired temperature is reached and then back to high speed; - determine the location of the sensing element which controls the discharge air temperature. If it measures return air temperature, the thermostat may have to be set- higher to avoid chilling injury or freezing injury of the produce; - a solid return air bulkhead should be installed at the front of the trailer; - a heating device should be available for transportation in areas with extreme cold weather; - equipment with a top air delivery system should have a fabric air chute or metal ceiling duct in good condition. 2.13 Produce requiring refrigeration should be thoroughly precooled, if necessary, prior to loading into transportation equipment. Produce temperatures should be taken with an appropriate thermometer and recorded on the bill of lading for future reference. The load compartment in the equipment also should be precooled to the recommended transport or storage temperature for the produce. It is advisable that the loading area should be enclosed and if available, the loading dock doorway area should be equipped with doorway air seals. 2.14 Proper loading practices are critical to maintaining temperature and relative humidity, protecting the produce from impact and vibration forces in transit, and preventing insects from entering the load. Special care must be taken when shipping mixed loads. The produce must be compatible. 2.15 Basic loading methods include: - bulk loading, by machine or hand, of unpackaged commodities; - hand loading individual shipping containers, with or without pallets; - unit loading of palletized or slipsheet loads of containers with pallet jacks or forklifts. 2.16 Inadequate provisions for air circulation will ruin a load, even in well designed transportation equipment. When possible, shipping containers should be kept off shallow floors and away from flat sidewalls by using pallets, racks, and dunnage. Adequate head space between the upper row of cartons and the top of the container should be allowed; this may be done by taping or gluing the upper row of cartons or by using appropriately designed packages for this purpose. Room for air circulation must be provided under, around and through the load to protect the produce from: - heat gain from the outside air during hot weather; - heat generated by the produce through respiration; - accumulation of ethylene from ripening of the produce; - heat loss to the outside air during extreme cold weather; - chilling injury or freezing injury during operation of the refrigeration unit. 2.17 Shippers using refrigerated transport equipment should follow the carrier's recommendations on loading of the equipment's load compartment to avoid chilling injury or freezing injury to the produce. Discharge air may be colder than the set-point temperature if the refrigeration system operates on return air temperature sensing. 2.18 Loads should be secured with one or more of the following materials to prevent the effects of vibrations and impact damage in transport and handling: - aluminum or wood load locks; - paperboard or fibreboard honeycomb fillers; -- 3 of 8 -- CXC 44-1995 Page 4 of 8 - wood blocking and nailing strips; - inflatable kraft paper air bags; - cargo nets and straps; - wood load gates constructed of 25 mm x 100 mm (1 x 4 in) material. 2.19 If available all loads should have a small air temperature recorder placed between packages in the area where the warmest temperatures occur. Recorder companies recommend placement on top of the load, near a side wall, one-third of the way in from the rear doors, away from any direct discharge of refrigerated air. Rail cars should have two or three recorders. In loads with top-ice or humidity above 95%, the recorders should be waterproof or enclosed in a plastic bag. 2.19.1 Shippers and receivers must follow the temperature recorder companies instructions on documenting the load, starting the recorder, reading the results, and returning it for calibration and certification if necessary. These steps are essential for settling claims over temperature management during transportation. 2.20 Similar sized shipping containers should be loaded together in mixed loads for increased stability. Heavier shipping containers of produce should be loaded first, distributed evenly across the floor of the trailer or container. Lighter shipping containers can then be placed against or on top of the heavier produce. Load lock and secure stacks of different sized shipping containers. To facilitate inspection of mixed loads at ports of entry, a representative sample of each commodity should be available near the door. This can minimize the unloading of cargo for examination. 2.21 Never load fruit, vegetables, or other food products with cargoes that provide any risk of contamination through transfer of odour or toxic chemical residues. The longer the transit time, the higher the risks in transporting mixed loads of agricultural produce. Therefore it is essential that guidelines be followed as much as possible to maintain quality in distant markets. 2.22 Modified atmospheres of reduced oxygen and elevated carbon dioxide and nitrogen are provided to trailers and containers after loading is completed. The trailers and containers must be equipped with channels at the doorway for a plastic film curtain and gas ports for the application of the treatment. 2.23 The refrigeration unit, walls, ceiling, floor, and doors must adequately seal the inside of the cargo area from outside air. Otherwise the modified atmosphere will quickly dissipate. Warning labels must be applied to the equipment to warn that the atmosphere is not life supporting and that the cargo area must be properly ventilated before personnel enter to unload the cargo. - SECTION III - PACKAGING TO MAINTAIN PRODUCE QUALITY DURING TRANSPORTATION AND MARKETING 3.1 Packaging must withstand: - rough handling during loading and unloading; - compression from the overhead weight of other containers; - impact and vibration during transportation; - high humidity during precooling, transit, and storage. 3.2 Packaging materials are chosen on the basis of needs of the produce, packing method, precooling method, strength, cost, availability, buyer specifications, and freight rates. Importers, buyers, and packaging manufacturers provide valuable recommendations. Materials used include: - paperboard or fibreboard bins, boxes (glued, stapled, interlocking), lugs, trays, flats, dividers or partitions, and slipsheets; - wood bins, crates (wirebound, nailed), baskets, trays, lugs, pallets; - paper bags, sleeves, wraps, liners, pads, excelsior, and labels; -- 4 of 8 -- CXC 44-1995 Page 5 of 8 - plastic bins, boxes, trays, bags (mesh, solid), containers, sleeves, film wraps, liners, dividers, and slipsheets; - foam boxes, trays, lugs, sleeves, liners, dividers, and pads. 3.3 Bins, boxes, crates, trays, lugs, baskets, and bags are considered shipping containers. Baskets, however, are difficult to handle in mixed loads of rectangular boxes. Bags provide limited produce protection. The fibreboard type box is a widely used container. Styles include for example: - one-piece slotted box with glued, stapled, or self-locking flaps; - two-piece half slotted box with a cover; - two-piece half slotted box with a full telescoping cover, providing strong walls and corners; - three-piece Bliss-style box featuring stapled or glued ends providing strong corners; - one-piece box with full telescoping cover; - two-piece, die-cut style box with full telescoping cover; - one-piece box with wire or fibreboard tabs or hardboard end inserts and plastic end caps, providing stacking strength and alignment. 3.3.1 Fibreboard boxes for produce which are packed wet or with ice must be wax-impregnated or coated with water resistant material. The compression strength of untreated fibreboard can be reduced more than one half in conditions of 90% relative humidity. In addition to maintaining box strength, wax helps to reduce the loss of moisture from the produce to the fibreboard. All glued boxes should be made with a water resistant adhesive. 3.3.2 The majority of fibreboard boxes and wood crates are designed to be stacked top to bottom. Compression strength and produce protection are sacrificed when boxes or crates are stacked on their ends or sides. Misaligned boxes can lose up to 50% of their top to bottom compression strength. 3.4 Various materials are added to shipping containers to provide additional strength and produce protection. Dividers or partitions and double or triple thickness sides and ends in fibreboard boxes provide additional compression strength and reduce produce damage. 3.4.1 Pads, wraps, and sleeves and excelsior also reduce bruising. Pads also are used to provide moisture as with asp