CXC 66 - 2008 Page 1 of 29 This Code replaces CXC 21-1979; Adopted in 2008, Annex II adopted in 2009 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR POWDERED FORMULAE FOR INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN CXC 66 - 2008 INTRODUCTION It is recognized internationally that breast milk is the best source of nutrition for infants. However, there are instances where it may be insufficient or not available and thus, may need to be supplemented or replaced. In those instances, one of the dietary options is the use of powdered formulae (PF). For the purposes of this document, “powdered formulae” include the following:  Infant formulae and formulae for special medical purposes intended for infants, which serve as the sole source of nutrition1;  Follow-up formulae which are used in combination with other foods as part of the weaning diet of older infants and young children2;  Powdered formulae for special medical purposes for infants and young children, intended to partially replace or supplement breast milk, infant formulae or follow-up formulae3;  Human milk fortifiers used to supplement breast milk. These products are to be distinguished from ready-to-feed liquid formulae that have been commercially sterilized. As dehydrated products, it is not possible using current technology to produce powdered formulae that are devoid of low levels of microorganisms, i.e., the products cannot be sterilized. Thus, their microbiological safety requires strict adherence to good hygienic practices during both manufacture and use. Two FAO/WHO meetings of experts on the microbiological safety of powdered infant formula4,5 considered cases of illnesses in infants associated with PF consumption either epidemiologically or microbiologically. They identified three categories of microorganisms based on the strength of evidence of a causal association between their presence in PF and illness in infants: A) microorganisms with a clear evidence of causality, namely, Salmonella enterica6 and Enterobacter sakazakii7; B) microorganisms for which the causality is plausible but not yet demonstrated, i.e., they are well-established causes of illness in infants and have been found in PF, but contaminated formula has not been convincingly shown, either epidemiologically or microbiologically, to be the vehicle and source of infection, e.g., other Enterobacteriaceae; and C) microorganisms for which causality is less plausible or not yet demonstrated, including microorganisms, 1 Standard for Infant Formula and Formulas for Special Medical Purposes Intended for Infants (CODEX STAN 72- 108). 2 Standard for Follow-up Formula (CODEX STAN 156-1987). 3 Covered in the scope of the Standard for Labelling of and Claims for Foods for Special Medical Purposes (CODEX STAN 180-1991). 4 FAO/WHO. 2004. Enterobacter sakazakii and other microorganisms in powdered infant formula: meeting report, Microbiological Risk Assessment Series 6. 5 FAO/WHO. 2006. Enterobacter sakazakii and Salmonella in powdered infant formula: meeting report, Microbiological Risk Assessment Series 10. 6 Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica includes the various Salmonella serotypes associated with foodborne illness such as S. enterica subsp. enterica serotype Typhimurium, which is commonly referred to as Salmonella Typhimurium. The genus name Salmonella will be used in the text to refer to the pathogenic serotypes of S. enterica subspecies enterica. 7 The reclassification of Enterobacter sakazakii into a new genus, Cronobacter has been proposed based on a manuscript by Iversen et al., International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology (2008), 58. The 31st Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (2008) while adopting the Code had agreed to change Enterobacter sakazakii into Enterobacter sakazakii(Cronobacter species) throughout the text. -- 1 of 29 -- CXC 66 - 2008 Page 2 of 29 which despite causing illness in infants, have not been identified in PF, or microorganisms which have been identified in PF but have not been implicated as causing such illness in infants, including Bacillus cereus, Clostridium botulinum, C. difficile, C. perfringens, Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus. Salmonella is a well-known long-standing foodborne human pathogen. The incidence of salmonellosis among infants, originating from various sources, was reported to be more than eight times greater than the incidence across all ages in the United States of America (CDC, 2004). Infants are also more likely to experience severe illness or death from salmonellosis, and infants with immunocompromising conditions are particularly vulnerable. It is unclear whether the increased incidence of salmonellosis among infants results from greater susceptibility, or whether infants are more likely than persons in other age groups to seek medical care or have stool cultures performed for symptoms of salmonellosis. At least 6 reported outbreaks of salmonellosis involving approximately 287 infants have been associated with PF between 1985 and 2005. Most of these outbreaks involved unusual Salmonella serotypes, which likely aided in recognition of those outbreaks. It is recognized that outbreaks and sporadic cases of salmonellosis due to powdered infant formula are likely to be under-reported5. Enterobacter sakazakii(Cronobacter species) has recently emerged as a pathogen of infants. The FAO/WHO expert meetings have identified all infants (<12 months of age) as the population at particular risk for E. sakazakii (Cronobacter species) infections. Among this group, those at greatest risk are neonates (<28 days), particularly pre-term, low-birthweight (<2500 g), and immunocompromised infants, and those less than 2 months of age4,5. Infants of HIV-positive mothers are also at risk, because they may specifically require infant formula and may be more susceptible to infection5, 8. Infections from E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) have been documented as both sporadic cases and outbreaks. While the incidence of these E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) infections in infants appears to be low, the consequences can be severe. The primary manifestations of E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) infection in infants, i.e., meningitis and bacteraemia, tend to vary with age. E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) meningitis tends to develop in infants during the neonatal period, while E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) bacteraemia tends to develop in premature infants outside of the neonatal period with most cases occurring in infants less than 2 months of age. However, infants with immunocompromising conditions have developed bacteraemia as late as 10 months of age and previously healthy infants have also developed invasive disease outside the neonatal period. Infections have occurred in both hospital and outpatient settings. It was noted that as older infants generally live at home in the community, infections in such infants may be more likely to be under-reported. Reported fatality rates of E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) infections in infants vary considerably with rates as high as 50 percent reported in at least one outbreak. In addition, a portion of surviving infants has permanent disabilities such as retardation and other neurological conditions.Although all known outbreaks have involved infants, sporadic cases have been reported in children and adults, however these have not been linked to PF.4 While PF was established as the source of E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) in some of the cases, in many others it was neither epidemiologically nor microbiologically implicated as the source of infection. However, in such cases, no other source of infection has been epidemiologically or microbiologically implicated. E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) is widely found in the environment, so infants, children and adults may be exposed to this organism from a range of sources. Outbreaks of E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) infections have led to the link with PF, especially in the context of neonatal intensive care setting. E. sakazakii (Cronobacter species) is known to be present at low 8 WHO, HIV and infant feeding: framework for priority action. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2003. HIV and Infant Feeding: New Evidence and Programmatic Experience (Report of the Technical Consultation, Geneva, Switzerland, 25-27 October 2006, held on behalf of the interagency task team (IATT) on preventing HIV infection in pregnant women, mothers and their infants (2007). -- 2 of 29 -- CXC 66 - 2008 Page 3 of 29 concentration in a proportion of PF. While the microorganism has been detected in other types of food and environmental settings, only PF has been linked to outbreaks of disease. For infants at greatest risk, e.g. neonatal intensive care settings, commercially sterile liquid infant formula should be used if available unless the attending physician recommends otherwise. If a non-commercially sterile feeding option is chosen, an effective point-of-use decontamination procedure should be used. There are four routes by which E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) and Salmonella can enter PF: 1) through the ingredients added in dry mixing operations during the manufacturing of PF, 2) through contamination of the formula from the processing environment in the steps during or following the drying, 3) through contamination of the PF after the package is opened, and 4) through contamination during or after reconstitution by the caregiver prior to feeding. E. sakazakii(Cronobacter species) may be found in many environments such as food factories, hospitals, institutions, day-care facilities and homes. In manufacturing, the organism may gain access to the processing line and product, since current technology cannot completely eliminate this organism from the manufacturing environment. Prevention efforts must be multi-faceted, directed at manufacturers, health-care providers, day care centres as well as infant caregivers in home settings, and take into consideration the risk to infants both within and beyond the neonatal period. Product labelling, consumer education programs and staff training at hospitals should be updated as appropriate to provide adequate information to caregivers on the safe use of the product and to provide caution regarding the health hazards of inappropriate preparation and handling of PF. SECTION I. – OBJECTIVES The objective of this Code is to provide practical guidance and recommendations to governments, industry, health care professionals/caregivers of infants and young children, as appropriate, on the hygienic manufacture of PF and on the subsequent hygienic preparation, handling and use of reconstituted formulae. The Code supplements the Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) and the Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CXC 57-2004), with an emphasis on the control of microbiological hazards, in particular Salmonella and E. sakazakii (Cronobacter species). The Code identifies relevant control measures at the various steps in the food chain that can be employed to reduce the risks for infants and young children that are associated with the consumption of PF. SECTION II. – SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITIONS 2.1 SCOPE This Code covers the production, preparation and use of products available in powdered form, referred to as Powdered Formulae (PF) for the purpose of this document, and specifically manufactured to be used for infants and young children either as a breast milk substitute, to supplement infant formula or fortify human milk or in combination with other foods as part of the weaning diet for older infants and young children. Products included are infant formulae, follow-up formulae, formulae for special medical purposes intended for infants and which serve as the sole source of nutrition, human milk fortifiers and powdered formulae for special medical purposes for infants and young children intended to partially replace or supplement breast milk, infant formulae or follow-up formulae. The nutritional specifications of these products are beyond the scope of this document. Products should meet the nutritional specifications of the applicable Codex standards1,2. -- 3 of 29 -- CXC 66 - 2008 Page 4 of 29 2.1.2 ROLES OF GOVERNMENTS, INDUSTRY, AND CONSUMERS9 Intended users of the document include national governments, manufacturers, health care professionals and professional caregivers to infants and young children. Although the primary responsibility lies with the manufacturer for ensuring that PF manufactured are safe and suitable for their intended use, there is a continuum of effective control measures that need to be performed by other parties, including manufacturers of ingredients and packaging materials and caregivers of infants and young children, to minimize the risk and to assure the suitability of PF. The interrelationship and impact of one segment of the food chain on another segment is important to ensure that potential gaps in the food chain are addressed through communication and interaction between the suppliers of ingredients, the manufacturer, the distributor and the caregivers. It is principally the responsibility of the manufacturer to conduct the hazard analysis within the context of developing a control system based on HACCP or other equivalent systems and thus to identify and control hazards associated with the incoming ingredients; however, the caregivers should also have an understanding of the hazards associated with PF, so as to assist in minimizing risks associated with the hazards involved. To achieve an effective continuum for the purpose of reducing risk, the various parties should pay particular attention to the following responsibilities:  Producers and manufacturers of raw materials should ensure that good agricultural, hygienic and animal husbandry practices are employed at the farm level. These practices should be adapted, as appropriate, to any specific safety-related needs specified and communicated by the manufacturer.  Manufacturers of ingredients and packaging materials should utilize good manufacturing and good hygienic practices and have HACCP systems implemented. Any needs for additional measures communicated by the PF manufacturer, and that are needed to control hazards in PF should be implemented.  Manufacturers of PF should utilize good manufacturing and good hygienic practices, especially those presented in this Code. Any needs for additional measures with regard to controlling hazards earlier in the food chain should be effectively communicated to suppliers to enable them to adapt their operations to meet these measures. Likewise, the manufacturer may have to implement controls or adapt their manufacturing processes based on the ability of the ingredients supplier to minimize or prevent hazards associated with the ingredients. Such additional needs should be supported by an adequate hazard analysis and should, where appropriate, take into consider