CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF MYCOTOXIN CONTAMINATION IN CEREALS CXC 51-2003 Adopted in 2003. Amended in 2014, 2017. Revised in 2016. -- 1 of 16 -- CXC 51-2003 2 INTRODUCTION 1. Toxigenic fungi are prevalent in regions in climatic zones which allow for small and large scale cereal grain production. Although the species and strains may differ among grain-producing regions, these fungi are present in soils, in wild host plant species, in the residues of cultivated crops and stored grains and in the dust in drying and/or storage facilities. The fungi are associated with both pre-harvest and postharvest mycotoxin contamination in cereals. 2. The severity of pre-harvest fungal propagation is highly dependent upon weather conditions varying greatly from year to year in grain-producing regions. The severity of pre-harvest infection and propagation of toxigenic fungi can also vary with the degree of damage caused by insects and other non-toxigenic fungi. Because of these factors, mycotoxin concentrations observed in grains at harvest vary widely from year to year. Reliable prevention of pre-harvest fungal infection has been proven to be elusive, even with application of good agricultural practices (GAP) and commercially available fungicides. Cereal breeding has resulted in only modest gains in genetic resistance to the Fusarium ear blight (Fusarium head blight) of cereals in cultivars with acceptable quality, yield and tolerance to other important cereal diseases. 3. The severity of post-harvest fungal infection and propagation during prolonged periods of grain storage can be managed more predictably through GAP and good manufacturing practices (GMP) that ensure that moisture levels in stored grain remain below levels that are conducive to germination of spores of common post-harvest fungal species specific to the environmental conditions present in the region. However, research has confirmed that spores of such species are ubiquitous in soils, equipment, and storage structures despite diligent cleaning. Consequently, germination of the spores of the mycotoxigenic species can occur within certain temperature ranges if even a small amount of stored grain develops elevated moisture levels from exposure to precipitation or insect infestation. The size and design of large grain storage structures and the limited access to technology often make precise monitoring of moisture and temperature in stored grain extremely difficult or otherwise impractical. 4. Risk of post-harvest fungal infection and production of mycotoxins in stored grain increases with the duration of storage. However, long term storage, generally throughout an entire crop year or for even longer periods, may be required depending on the grain needs of the specific production region where the commodity is being stored. This may be due to reasons of food security and the continuous input into storage of necessary cereal grains for direct consumption, processing and/or animal feed. 5. The complete prevention of dissemination by pre-harvest and post-harvest toxigenic fungal species is not practically achievable, even when GAP and GMP are followed. Therefore, the intermittent presence of certain mycotoxins in cereal grains destined for human food and animal feed use is to be expected. Thus diligent monitoring of cereal grains in the field and during storage for indications of the various conditions that promote fungal contamination and mycotoxin accumulation is imperative to determine disposition of the commodity. 6. This Code of Practice provides current and relevant information for all countries to consider in their efforts to prevent and reduce mycotoxin contamination in cereal grains, grain-derived foods and animal feeds. In order for this Code of Practice to be effective, it will be necessary for national authorities, producers, marketers, and processors in each country to consider the general principles and examples of GAP and GMP provided in the Code, taking into account their local crops, climate, and agronomic practices to enable and facilitate adoption of these practices where relevant and feasible. This Code of Practice is expected to apply to all cereal grains and cereal products relevant to human dietary intake and health as well as international trade. 7. It is important for grain producers to realise that GAP, including postharvest, storage, handling procedures, represent the primary line of defence against contamination of cereals with mycotoxins, followed by the implementation of GMP during the handling, storage, processing and distribution of cereals for food and animal feed. Processing industries also have a role to implement GMP where required, mainly during grain sorting, cleaning and processing. 8. Cereal grain producers should be trained to follow GAP and maintain a close relationship with agricultural advisors, extension services and national authorities to obtain information and advice regarding the choice of appropriate cereal grain cultivars and plant protection products suitable for use in their respective production regions so as to reduce incidence and levels of mycotoxins. 9. This Code of Practice contains general principles for the reduction of various mycotoxins in cereals. For the education of producers, handlers and processors, and providing information on testing to relevant parties, the following should be observed: -- 2 of 16 -- CXC 51-2003 3 (a) National authorities and/or other organisations should educate producers regarding the environmental factors that favour infection and growth of toxigenic fungi, and mycotoxin production in cereal crops at the farm level. Emphasis should be placed on the fact that the planting, pre-harvest and postharvest strategies for a particular crop will depend on the climatic conditions of that particular region and year, taking into account the local crops, and traditional production methods for that particular country or region. National authorities should support scientific research on methods and techniques to prevent fungal growth in the field and during harvest and storage. (b) In order to avoid undue disruption of grain shipment operations, validated analytical methods and associated sampling plans should be utilised by producers/handlers/processors to quickly determine mycotoxin levels. The proper implementation of sampling plans and use of any such analytical methods or tools are critical to their provision of accurate information and data. This will require adequate resources and training to ensure that sampling plans are followed and test procedures can be properly performed. Procedures should be in place to properly handle, through segregation, reconditioning, recall or diversion, cereal crops that may pose a threat to human and/or animal health. 10. This Code for the prevention and reduction of mycotoxins in cereal grains and grain-derived foods and feeds recommends practices based on GAP and GMP and are generally consistent with Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP) principles which are incorporated into current food safety practices and certification schemes now in global use in production, storage, handling, transportation, processing, distribution and trade. The implementation of HACCP principles will minimise mycotoxin contamination through applications of preventive control measures to the extent feasible, mainly during storage and processing of cereals. I. RECOMMENDED PRACTICES BASED ON GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES (GAP) AND GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES (GMP) PLANTING AND CROP ROTATION 11. Consider developing and maintaining an appropriate crop rotation/sequence schedule to avoid planting the same crop in the same field, for two consecutive seasons. This can help to reduce the inoculum in the field which may originate from debris remaining after harvest that harbours toxigenic fungal spores. Some crops have been found to be particularly susceptible to certain species of toxigenic fungi and the use in rotation with each other should be evaluated. Table 1 shows the most susceptible crops to toxigenic fungi and the mycotoxins that can be produced. Some of these crops are infected after harvest and the resulting seeds can carry toxigenic fungal spores. Crops of low susceptibility to toxigenic fungi such as clover, alfalfa and other legumes can be used in rotation to reduce the inocula in the field. Wheat and maize have been found to be particularly susceptible to Fusarium species and they should not be used at very close positions in rotation with each other, if possible. When used in the same rotation, inclusion of soybeans, oilseeds, pulses and forage crops may reduce the incidence and severity of pre-harvest infection. Table 1. Susceptible rotation crops to toxigenic fungi associated with production of mycotoxins (not exhaustive) Crops Fungi Potential of Mycotoxins Peanuts Aspergillus flavus A. parasiticus A. nomius And other related species Aflatoxins Maize A. flavus A. parasiticus and other related species Aflatoxins Fusarium graminearum F. culmorum deoxynivalenol,nivalenol, zearalenone F.verticillioides F. proliferatum fumonisins Sorghum Fusarium graminearum Fusarium spp. deoxynivalenol,nivalenol, zearalenone and diacetoxyscirpenol Alternaria spp. alternariol, alternariol methyl ether, tenuazonic acid and altenuene -- 3 of 16 -- CXC 51-2003 4 Crops Fungi Potential of Mycotoxins F. verticillioides F. proliferatum fumonisins A. flavus A. parasiticus A. section Flavi Aflatoxins P. verrucosum A. ochraceus and related species A. carbonarius A. niger ochratoxin A Claviceps purpurea C. Africana C. sorghi and related species ergot alkaloids A. versicolor sterigmatocystin Wheat Alternaria spp. alternariol, alternariol methyl ether, tenuazonic acid F. graminearum F. culmorum F. asiaticum deoxynivalenol,nivalenol, zearalenone Barley F. graminearum F. culmorum F. asiaticum deoxynivalenol,nivalenol, zearalenone Oats F. graminearum F. culmorum F. langsethii deoxynivalenol,nivalenol, zearalenone, T-2 and HT-2 toxin Rye F. graminearum Claviceps purpurea deoxynivalenol, ergot alkaloids Cotton A. flavus A. parasticus Aflatoxins Millet F. graminearum Deoxynivalenol Triticale F. graminearum Deoxynivalenol TILLAGE AND PREPARATION FOR SEEDING (PLANTING) 12. When possible and practical, use toxigenic fungi free certified seeds and prepare the seed bed for each new crop by plowing under or by destroying or removing old seed heads, stalks, and other debris that may have served, or may potentially serve as substrates for the growth of mycotoxin producing fungi. However, tilling may not be appropriate with respect to other economic and environmental benefits, such as moisture conservation, maintenance of soil organic matter, reduced erosion, and lower fuel and water use, hence its costs and benefits should be considered prior to application. 13. Utilise the results of soil tests to determine if there is a need to apply fertilizer and/or soil conditioners to assure adequate soil pH and plant nutrition to avoid plant stress, especially during seed development stage of crop growth. 14. When available, grow varieties (cultivars) that were developed and selected for their traits of providing at least partial resistance to both non-toxigenic and toxigenic fungi and insect pests and for lower mycotoxin accumulation. It is important to plant only those varieties recommended for use in a particular area of a country by virtue of their specific physiological and agronomic traits. 15. As far as practical, crop planting should be timed to avoid high temperature and drought stress during the period of seed development and maturation. Predictive models, when available, could be used as a tool to plan for the best planting period. 16. Ensure appropriate density of planting by maintaining the recommended row and intra- plant spacing for the species/varieties grown. Information concerning plant- spacing may be provided by seed companies, national authorities or extension services. -- 4 of 16 -- CXC 51-2003 5 PRE-HARVEST 17. Where possible, minimise insect damage and fungal infection in the vicinity of the crop by proper use of approved pesticides and other appropriate practices within an integrated pest management programme. Predictive weather models could be used to plan the best application timing and mode of pesticide application. 18. As certain weed species can act as hosts for toxigenic fungi that can increase plant stress due to competition of weed species during crop development, it is important to control weeds in the crop by using mechanical methods, registered herbicides or other safe and suitable weed eradication practices utilising an integrated pest management programme. 19. Minimise mechanical damage to plants during cultivation, irrigation and pest management practices. Minimise lodging of plants to prevent contact of the aerial parts of the plants with soil, particularly at the flowering stage of the crop. Soil and soil water are sources of inoculum (spores) of toxigenic fungal species. 20. If irrigation is used, ensure that it is applied evenly and that all plants in the field have an adequate supply of water. Irrigation is a valuable method of reducing plant stress in some growing situations. Excess precipitation during anthesis (flowering) makes conditions favourable for dissemination and infection by Fusarium spp.; thus irrigation during anthesis and during the ripening of the crops, specifically wheat, barley, and rye, should be avoided. 21. Plan to harvest grain at low moisture content and full maturity, unless allowing the crop to continue to full maturity would subject it to extreme heat, rainfall or drought conditions. Delayed harvest of grain already infected by Fusarium species may cause an increase in the mycotoxin content of the crop. Models could be used to predict the mycotoxin production based on environmental conditions, such as climate conditions and agricultural production conditions, being a guide to timely monitoring and surveying of mycotoxin levels. 22. If mechanical drying equipment is available, earlier harvest may be helpful in limiting mycotoxin production during the final stages of crop maturation. It is important to use proper drying techniques in order to avoid contamination by contaminants generated by improper drying techniques such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH)1 and dioxins2. 23. Before harvest ensure that all equipment, to be used for harvesting, drying, cleaning and storage of crops, is in a good working order and cleaned of crop residues, grain and dust as much as possible. A breakdown of equipment during this critical period may cause grain quality losses and enhance mycotoxin formation. Keep important spare parts available on the farm to minimise time loss from repairs. Make sure that the equipment needed for moisture content measurements is available and calibrated. HARVEST 24. Containers and conveyances (e.g. wagons, 