CODE OF PRACTICE ON GOOD ANIMAL FEEDING CXC 54-2004 Adopted in 2004. Amended in 2008 and 2024. -- 1 of 10 -- CXC 54-2004 2 1. INTRODUCTION 1. This code is to establish a feed safety system for food-producing animals which covers the whole food chain, taking into account relevant aspects of animal health and the environment in order to minimize risks to consumers’ health. This code applies in addition to the principles of food hygiene already established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC),i taking into account the special aspects of animal feeding. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE 2. The objective of this code is to help ensure the safety of food for human consumption through adherence to good animal feeding practice at the farm level and good manufacturing practices (GMPs) during the procurement, handling, storage, processing and distribution of animal feed and feed ingredients for food- producing animals. 3. This code of practice applies to the production and use of all materials destined for animal feed and feed ingredients at all levels whether produced industrially or on-farm. It also includes grazing or free-range feeding, forage crop production and aquaculture. 4. Those issues of animal welfare other than food safety related animal health are not covered. Environmental contaminants should be considered where the level of such substances in the feed and feed ingredients could present a risk to consumers’ health from the consumption of foods of animal origin. 5. While recognizing that, in its totality, a feed safety system would address animal health and environmental issues, in addition to consumers’ health, this code of practice, in fulfilling the Codex mandate of consumer protection, only addresses food safety. Notwithstanding this, best efforts have been made to ensure that the recommendations and practices in this code of practice will not be detrimental to the more general animal health and environmental aspects of animal feeding. 3. DEFINITIONS 6. For the purpose of this code: Feed (feeding stuff): any single or multiple materials, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, which is intended to be fed directly to food-producing animals. Feed ingredient: a component part or constituent of any combination or mixture making up a feed, whether or not it has a nutritional value in the animal’s diet, including feed additives. Ingredients are of plant, animal or aquatic origin or other organic or inorganic substances. Feed additive:iiany intentionally added ingredient not normally consumed as feed by itself, whether or not it has nutritional value, which affects the characteristics of feed or animal products. Medicated feed: any feed which contains veterinary drugs as defined in the CAC Procedural Manual.1 Undesirable substances: contaminants and other substances which are present in and/or on feed and feed ingredients and which constitute a risk to consumers’ health, including food safety related animal health issues. i See recommended international code of practice – General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). ii Microorganisms, enzymes, acidity regulators, trace elements, vitamins and other products fall within the scope of this definition depending on the purpose of use and method of administration. -- 2 of 10 -- CXC 54-2004 3 4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS 7. Feed and feed ingredients should be obtained and maintained in a stable condition so as to protect feed and feed ingredients from contamination by pests, or by chemical, physical or microbiological contaminants or other objectionable substances during production, handling, storage and transport. Feed should be in good condition and meet generally accepted quality standards. Where appropriate, good agricultural practices (GAPs), GMPs and, where applicable, Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP) principlesiii should be followed to control hazards that may occur in food. Potential sources of contamination from the environment should be considered. 8. Parties that produce feed or feed ingredients, those that rear animals for use as food and those that produce such animal products need to collaborate to identify potential hazards and their levels of risk to consumers’ health. Such collaboration will enable the development and maintenance of appropriate risk management options and safe feeding practices. 4.1 Feed ingredients 9. Feed ingredients should be obtained from safe sources and be subject to a risk analysis where the ingredients are derived from processes or technologies not hitherto evaluated from a food safety point of view. The procedure used should be consistent with the Working principles for risk analysis for application in the framework of the Codex Alimentarius.iv Manufacturers of feed additives in particular, should provide clear information to the user to permit correct and safe use. Monitoring of feed ingredients should include inspection, sampling and analysis for undesirable substances using risk-based protocols. Feed ingredients should meet acceptable and, if applicable, statutory standards for levels of pathogens, mycotoxins, pesticides and undesirable substances that may give rise to consumers’ health hazards. 4.2 Labelling 10. Labelling should be clear and informative as to how the user should handle, store and use feed and feed ingredients. Labelling should be consistent with any statutory requirements and should describe the feed and provide instructions for use. Labelling or the accompanying documents should contain, where appropriate: • information about the species or category of animals for which the feed is intended; • the purpose for which the feed is intended; • a list of feed ingredients, including appropriate reference to additives, in descending order of proportion; • contact information of manufacturer or registrant; • registration number if available; • directions and precautions for use; • lot identification; • manufacturing date; and • “use before” or expiry date. 11. This subsection does not apply to labelling of feed and feed ingredients derived from modern biotechnology.v 4.3 Traceability/product tracing and record keeping of feed and feed ingredients 12. Traceability/product tracing of feed and feed ingredients, including additives, should be enabled by proper record keeping for timely and effective withdrawal or recall of products if known or probable adverse effects on consumers’ health are identified. Records should be maintained and readily available regarding the production, distribution and use of feed and feed ingredients to facilitate the prompt trace-back of feed and feed ingredients to the immediate previous source and trace-forward to the next subsequent recipients if known or probable adverse effects on consumers’ health are identified.vi 4.3.1 Special conditions applicable to emergency situations 13. Operators should, as soon as reasonable, inform the competent authorities in the country if they consider that a feed or feed ingredient does not satisfy the feed safety requirements established in this code. The information should be as detailed as possible and should at least contain a description of the nature of the iii Hazard analysis and critical control point, as defined in the annex to the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). iv See Working principles for risk analysis for application in the framework of the Codex Alimentarius (Codex Alimentarius Commission Procedural Manual). v Whether and how to label animal feed and feed ingredients derived from modern biotechnology awaits developments on food labelling, being considered by the Codex Committee on Food Labelling. vi Development of detailed measures on traceability/product tracing should take into account the Principles for traceability/product tracing as a tool within a food inspection and certification system (CXG 60-2006). -- 3 of 10 -- CXC 54-2004 4 problem, a description of the feed or feed ingredients, the species for which it is intended, the lot identifier, the name of the manufacturer and the place of origin. The competent authorities and operators should immediately take effective measures to ensure that those feed or feed ingredients do not pose any danger to consumers’ health. 14. As soon as it becomes likely that a particular feed or feed ingredient is to be traded internationally and may pose a danger to consumers’ health, the competent authorities of the exporting countries should notify, at least, the competent authorities of the relevant importing countries. The notification should be as detailed as possible and should at least contain the particulars indicated in the previous paragraph. 4.4 Inspection and control procedures 15. Feed and feed ingredients manufacturers and other relevant parts of industry should practice self- regulation/auto-control to secure compliance with required standards for production, storage and transport. It will also be necessary for risk-based official regulatory programmes to be established to check that feed and feed ingredients are produced, distributed and used in such a way that foods of animal origin for human consumption are both safe and suitable. Inspection and control procedures should be used to verify that feed and feed ingredients meet requirements in order to protect consumers against foodborne hazards.vii Inspection systems should be designed and operated on the basis of objective risk assessment appropriate to the circumstances.viii Preferably, the risk assessment methodology employed should be consistent with internationally accepted approaches. Risk assessment should be based on current available scientific evidence. 16. Monitoring of feed and feed ingredients, whether by industry or official inspection bodies, should include inspection and sampling and analysis to detect unacceptable levels of undesirable substances. 4.5 Health hazards associated with animal feed 17. All feed and feed ingredients should meet minimum safety standards. It is essential that levels of undesirable substances are sufficiently low in feed and feed ingredients that their concentration in food for human consumption is consistently below the level of concern. Codex maximum residue limits and extraneous maximum residue levels set for feed should be applied. Maximum residue limits set for food, such as those established by the CAC, may be useful in determining minimum safety standards for feed. 4.5.1 Feed additives and veterinary drugs used in medicated feed 18. Feed additives and veterinary drugs used in medicated feed should be assessed for safety and used under stated conditions of use as pre-approved by the competent authorities. 19. Veterinary drugs used in medicated feed should comply with the provisions of the Codex Guidelines for the design and implementation of national regulatory food safety assurance programmes associated with the use of veterinary drugs in food-producing animals (CXG 71-2009).2 20. Borderlines between feed additives and veterinary drugs used in medicated feed may be set to avoid misuse. 21. Feed additives should be received, handled and stored to maintain their integrity and to minimize misuse or unsafe contamination. Feed containing them should be used in strict accordance with clearly defined instructions for use. 22. Antibiotics should not be used in feed for growth promoting purposes in the absence of a public health safety assessment.ix 4.5.2 Feed and feed ingredients 23. Feed and feed ingredients should only be produced, marketed, stored and used if they are safe and suitable, and, when used as intended, should not represent in any way an unacceptable risk to consumers’ health. In particular, feed and feed ingredients contaminated with unacceptable levels of undesirable substances should be clearly identified as unsuitable for animal feed and not be marketed or used. 24. Feed and feed ingredients should not be presented or marketed in a manner liable to mislead the user. vii See Principles for food import and export inspection and certification (CXG 20-1995). viiiSee Guidelines for the design, operation, assessment and accreditation of food import and export inspection and certification systems (CXG 26-1997). ix See WHO Global Principles for the Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance in Animals Intended for Food, June 2000, Geneva, Switzerland. -- 4 of 10 -- CXC 54-2004 5 4.5.3 Undesirable substances 25. The presence in feed and feed ingredients of undesirable substances such as industrial and environmental contaminants, pesticides, radionuclides, persistent organic pollutants, pathogenic agents and toxins such as mycotoxins should be identified, controlled and minimized. Animal products that could be a source of the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) agentx should not be used for feeding directly to, or for feed manufacturing for, ruminants. Control measures applied to reduce unacceptable level of undesirable substances should be assessed in terms of their impact on food safety. 26. The risks of each undesirable substance to consumers’ health should be assessed and such assessment may lead to the setting of maximum limits for feed and feed ingredients or the prohibition of certain materials from animal feeding. 5. PRODUCTION, PROCESSING, STORAGE, TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION OF FEED AND FEED INGREDIENTS 27.The production, processing, storage, transport and distribution of safe and suitable feed and feed ingredients is the responsibility of all participants in the feed chain, including farmers, feed ingredient manufacturers, feed compounders, truckers, etc. Each participant in the feed chain is responsible for all activities that are under their direct control, including compliance with any applicable statutory requirements. 28. Feed and feed ingredients should not be produced, processed, stored, transported or distributed in facilities or using equipment where incompatible operations may affect their safety and lead to adverse effects on consumers’ health. Due to the unique characteristics of aquaculture, the application of these general principles must consider the differences between aquaculture and terrestrial-based production. 29. Where appropriate, operators should follow GMPs and, where applicable, HACCP principles to control hazards that may affect food safety. The aim is to ensure feed safety and in particular, to prevent contamination of animal feed and food of animal origin as far as this is reasonably achievable, recognizing that total elimination of hazards is often not possible. 30. The effective implementation of GMPs and, where applicable, HACCP-based approaches should ensure, in particular, that the following areas are addressed. 5.1 Premises 31. Buildings and equipment used to process feed and feed ingredients should be constructed in a manner that permits ease of operation, maintenance and cleaning and minimizes feed contamination. Process flow within the manufacturing facility should also be designed to minimize feed c