19 Adopted 2005. Revisions 2006, 2010. AFLATOXIN CONTAMINATION IN TREE NUTS CXC 59-2005 INTRODUCTION 1. The elaboration and acceptance of a Code of Practice for tree nuts by Codex will provide uniform guidance for all countries to consider in attempting to control and manage contamination by various mycotoxins, specifically aflatoxins. In order for this Code of Practice to be effective, it will be necessary for the producers and processors in each country to consider the general principles given in the Code, taking into account the agronomic and extractivistic1 practices associated with the tree nuts produced in their regions, before attempting to implement provisions enumerated in the Code. It is important for producers or extractivists to realize that Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) represent the primary line of defence against contamination of nuts with aflatoxins, followed by the implementation of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) Good Extractivistic Practices and Good Storage Practices (GSP) during the handling, processing, storage and distribution of nuts for human consumption. Only by effective control at all stages from the farm through to processing can excellent quality of the final product be assured. However, the complete elimination of mycotoxin contaminated commodities, including tree nuts, is not achievable at this time. 2. This Code of Practice applies to all varieties of tree nuts of commercial and international concern, including almonds (Prunus amygdalus), Brazil nuts (Bertholletia excelsa), cashews (Anacardium occidentale), hazel nuts (Corylus spp.), macadamia nuts (Macadamia spp.), pecans (Carya spp.), pine nuts (Pinus spp.), chestnuts (Castanea spp.), pistachio nuts (Pistacia spp.) and walnuts (Juglans spp.). It contains general principles for the reduction of aflatoxins in tree nuts that should be sanctioned by national authorities. National authorities should educate producers, extractivists, transporters, storage keepers and other operators of the production chain regarding the practical measures and environmental factors that promote infection and growth of fungi in tree nuts resulting in the production of aflatoxin in orchards or in the forest (areas of extractivism). Emphasis should be placed on the fact that the planting, pre-harvest and post-harvest strategies for a particular nut crop depends on the climatic 1 Brazil Nuts Extractivism: this is the process of collection and primarily handling of Brazil nuts in the Amazon rainforest where Brazil nut trees grow in their natural environment. -- 1 of 13 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 20 conditions of a particular year, and traditional production, harvesting and processing practices followed in a particular country or region. For Brazil nuts, the specific conditions related to extractivism have to be taken into account. National authorities should also support research on methods and techniques to prevent fungal contamination in the orchard or in the forest and during the harvesting, processing and storage of tree nuts. An important part of this is the understanding of the ecology of Aspergillus flavus/parasiticus in connection with tree nuts. 3. Fungi in the Aspergillus species are rapidly growing hyaline molds that are common opportunists found in the soil and on decaying matter. Their colonies are usually yellow, yellow-green, yellow-brown, or green; granular, velvety, or cottony; and have a white peripheral apron and a distinct margin. 4. The aflatoxin-producing Aspergillus species, and consequently dietary aflatoxin contamination, are ubiquitous in areas of the world with hot humid climates. Aspergillus flavus/A. parasiticus cannot grow or produce aflatoxins at water activities less than 0.7; relative humidity below 70% and temperatures below 10 ºC. Under stress conditions such as drought or insect infestation, aflatoxin contamination is likely to be high. Improper storage conditions can also lead to aflatoxin contamination after crops have been harvested. Usually, hot humid conditions lead to mould growth on the stored food and to high levels of aflatoxins. 5. Some procedures used to reduce and prevent aflatoxin production include: (1) selection of resistant varieties, if practicable, (2) minimize the presence of insects and other pests in the orchard during the growing phase, (3) minimize physical damage to nuts during harvesting and transportation, and (4) ensure that nuts are properly cleaned, dried and labelled when placed in a storage facility equipped with temperature and moisture controls. 1. SCOPE 6. This document is intended to provide guidance for all persons involved in producing tree nuts for entry into international trade for human consumption. All tree nuts should be prepared and handled in accordance with general hygienic principles and practices that are pointed out in appropriate sections of the Recommended International Code of Hygienic Practice for Tree Nuts2, and the Recommended International Code of Practice- General Principles of Food Hygiene3, which are relevant for all foods being prepared for human consumption. These codes of practice indicate the measures that should be implemented 2 Recommended International Code of Hygienic Practice for Tree Nuts, CXC 6-1972, Codex Alimentarius Volume 5A. 3 Recommended International Code of Practice- General Principles of Food Hygiene, CXC 1-1969, Rev. 4 (2003), Codex Alimentarius Volume 1A. -- 2 of 13 -- AFLATOXIN CONTAMINATION IN TREE NUTS (CXC 59-2005) 21 by all persons that have the responsibility for assuring that food is safe and suitable for consumption. 2. RECOMMENDED PRACTICES BASED ON GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES (GAP) GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES (GMP) AND GOOD STORAGE PRACTICES (GSP) 2.1 Criteria for orchard sites or picking sites 7. Growers should obtain background information concerning the potential orchard site to determine if: (1) the soil composition is ideal to support the growth of the desired tree variety(2) there is adequate drainage of ground water (3) there are any environmental factors inherent to that location (such as wind-, soil- and dust-borne contaminants and pollutants) that might have a negative impact on safety concerns for human foods and (4) there is an available source of water suitable for irrigation and other purposes. 8. Neighbouring fields should not be used for plants which are known to be easily infected with A. flavus/parasiticus (e.g. maize) and consequently serve as a source of infection (spores spread by winds, insects, etc). Furthermore plants carrying specific insects that damage tree nut kernels, which may be a vector in the infection process, should also be avoided. 9. If the tree nuts are obtained from around cultivation, the picker should ascertain that there are not any environmental factors inherent to that location (such as wind-, soil- and dust-borne contaminants and pollutants) that might have a negative impact on safety concerns for tree nuts. 2.2 Planting 10. In designing the layout of the orchard, information concerning plant spacing may be obtained from plant breeders or agricultural personnel. Adequate spacing is necessary so that trucks and equipment needed for spraying trees can be accommodated and that ventilation of the orchard is maintained to reduce the growth of fungi. 11. Where possible and practical, the orchard surface area should be prepared before planting by destroying or removing all debris that may have served, or may potentially serve as substrates for the growth of mycotoxin-producing fungi. If there are areas vulnerable to soil erosion, no-till practices may be required in the interests of soil conservation. 12. Before planting, growers should consult with appropriate plant breeding authorities or tree nursery personnel to ascertain the availability of species that are resistant to various factors (e.g., frost, microbial and fungal diseases) that can have an impact on the safety and quality of nuts produced in the orchard. -- 3 of 13 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 22 13. Growers should be familiar with GAPs associated with the use of formulated fertilizers, manure and other biosolids that may be used to enhance the nutritional state of the soil, without increasing the risks of introducing hazards originating from microbial or fungal sources in the orchard. 14. Growers should consult with local or national authorities to determine insects and other pests that are commonly found in their region that might attack tree nuts causing them to be more susceptible to fungal infections that can lead to aflatoxin production. 15. Growers should take adequate precautions to ensure that human and animal wastes are disposed of in such a manner as not to constitute a public health or hygienic hazard, and take extreme care to protect the products from contamination with these wastes. 2.3 Preharvest 16. During the growing seasons, roadways near the orchards should be watered or oiled periodically to minimize outbreaks of mites as a result of dusty conditions. Cultivation practices, in the vicinity of the orchard, that might disperse Aspergillus flavus/A. parasiticus, and other fungal spores in the soil to aerial parts of trees should be avoided. 17. Pesticides approved for use on tree nuts, including insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, acaricides, and nematocides should be used to minimize damage that might be caused by insects, fungal infections, and other pests in the orchard and adjacent areas. Accurate records of all pesticide applications should be maintained. 18. Irrigation should be implemented in regions with high temperatures and very little rainfall during the growing season to minimize tree stress, however, irrigation water should be prevented from contacting the nuts and foliage. 19. Water used for irrigation and other purposes (e.g., preparation of pesticide sprays) should be of suitable quality, according to the legislation of each country, for the intended use. 20. All equipment and machinery, which is to be used for harvesting, storage and transportation of crops, should not constitute a hazard to health. Before harvest time, all equipment and machinery should be inspected to ascertain that they are clean and in good working condition to avoid contamination of the nuts with soil and other potential hazards. 21. Trade Associations, as well as local and national authorities should take the lead in informing growers of the hazards associated with aflatoxin contamination of tree nuts -- 4 of 13 -- AFLATOXIN CONTAMINATION IN TREE NUTS (CXC 59-2005) 23 and how they may practice safe harvesting procedures to reduce the risk of contamination by fungi, microbes and pests. 22. Personnel that will be involved in harvesting nuts should be trained in personal hygienic and sanitary practices that must be implemented in processing facilities throughout the harvesting season. 2.4 Harvest 23. Harvesting of nuts should begin as soon as practicable after maturation to minimize diseases caused by fungal attack and insect infestation. Some varieties of nuts become contaminated with aflatoxins while still on the tree as a result of insect infestation and hull splitting, therefore, the earlier the harvest, the less chance there is for contamination to occur because there is a greater chance that the outer hull will remain intact to protect the underlying shell from insects and fungal spores. The area under the trees should be cleared of any debris or decayed materials where A. flavus or A. parasiticus might reside. 24. Nuts, harvested by shaking the trees, should ideally be collected by mechanical harvesters with catching frames, or on some type of protective sheets or tarps under the trees to prevent nuts from falling to the ground. In regions where certain varieties of nuts are traditionally harvested by shaking the trees and/or allowing mature nuts to fall freely to the ground for collection by harvesting equipment or by hand, the orchard should not be used for grazing or holding cattle or other animals. If the land has been so used, the land should be worked immediately prior to harvesting (disced, rotilled, soil turned in some manner, or other feasible methods), to lesson the hazard of fecal contamination of tree nuts. In addition, procedures should be in place to ensure their removal as soon as possible to decrease exposure to Aspergillus flavus/A. parasiticus spores that may be denser in the air near the ground and associated with plant debris. 25. The nuts, after collection, should be sorted to remove damaged, rotten, empty and rancified nuts, foreign materials, and transported, as soon as possible, to a processing facility for immediate processing (hull removal) in containers (e.g., trucks, conveyers) that are clean, dry, protected against humidity and free of insects and visible fungal growth. High humidities, which are conducive to proliferation of mold and development of mycotoxins, should be avoided to the greatest extent practical. Conveyances for transporting nuts should be constructed of a material that will permit thorough cleaning and maintenance so as not to constitute a source of contamination for tree nuts. If the nuts cannot be transported immediately to a processing facility they should be temporarily stored in a way that will keep them dry and protected from rain, insects, rodents, birds and drainage of ground water. -- 5 of 13 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 24 2.5 Post-harvest 26. Nuts remaining on the trees after harvest should be removed during the winter months to reduce the over wintering of various insect populations. 27. Trees should be pruned and, when needed, treated with appropriate pesticides prior to each growing season. 28. The orchard floor or woodland should be cleared of litter and debris from the harvesting operations in order to decrease the colonization of Aspergillus fungi in the orchard or woodland. 29. Containers, equipment and machinery that have been used for harvesting operations should be cleaned and stored in a clean location to minimize inadvertent contamination with fungi, chemicals, fertilizers or toxic substances. 30. Harvesting and storage procedures implemented each crop year should be documented by making notes of measurements (e.g., temperature, moisture, and humidity) and any deviation or changes from traditional practices. This information may be useful for explaining the cause(s) of fungal growth and mycotoxin formation during a particular crop year and help to avoid similar mistakes in the future. 2.6 Processing 31. Personnel involved in all stages of tree nut processing should maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness, wear suitable protective clothing, be trained in food hygiene and general sanitation procedures to a level appropriate to the operations they are to perform in the processing facility. A system should be i