CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF DIOXINS, DIOXIN-LIKE PCBs AND NON-DIOXIN-LIKE PCBs IN FOOD AND FEED CXC 62-2006 Adopted in 2006. Revised in 2018. -- 1 of 12 -- CXC 62-2006 2 INTRODUCTION General remarks 1. Dioxins, including polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (DL-PCBs) and non-dioxin-like PCBs (NDL-PCBs) are persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in the environment. Although dioxins and DL-PCBs show similarities in their toxicological and chemical behaviour, their sources are different. On the other hand while DL- PCBs and NDL-PCBs show a different toxicological behaviour, their sources are similaror the same. The NDL-PCBs account for the majority of the total PCB contamination, the remainder being DL-PCBs. 2. Current sources of dioxins and PCBs entering the food chain include new emissions and remobilisation of deposits or reservoirs in the environment. New emissions are mainly via the air route. Dioxins and PCBs decompose very slowly in the environment and remain there for very long periods of time. Therefore, a large part of current exposure is due to releases of dioxins and PCBs that occurred in the past. 3. PCBs were produced intentionally and in considerable amounts between the 1930s and 1970s and were used in a wide range of applications. PCBs are still in use in existing closed systems in certain countries and contained in solid matrices (e.g. sealing materials and electrical capacitors). Certain commercial PCBs are known to be contaminated with PCDFs and could therefore be regarded as a potential source for dioxin contamination. 4. Today, release of PCBs occurs from leakages, accidental spills and illegal disposal and through emissions via air from thermal processes. The emission of PCBs from paints and/or sealants into the environment e. g. during demolition and reconstruction of older buildings appears to be of some importance as a source. 5. Dioxins are formed as unwanted by-products from a number of human activities including certain industrial processes (e.g. production of chemicals, metallurgical industry) and combustion processes (e.g. waste incineration). Accidents at chemical factories have been shown to result in high emissions and contamination of local areas. Other dioxin sources include domestic furnaces as well as agricultural burning of harvest residues and backyard burning of household wastes. Natural processes such as volcanic eruptions and forest fires can also produce dioxins. 6. When released into the air, dioxins can deposit locally on plants and on soil, consequently contaminating both food and feed. Dioxins can also be widely distributed by long-range atmospheric transport. The amount of deposition varies with proximity to the source, plant species, weather conditions and other specific conditions (e.g. altitude, latitude, temperature). 7. Sources of dioxins in soil include deposition from atmospheric dioxins, application of contaminated sewage sludge to farm land, flooding of pastures with contaminated sludge, and prior use of contaminated pesticides (e.g., 2.4.5-trichlorophenoxy acetic acid) and fertilizers (e.g. certain composts). Other sources of dioxins in soil may be of natural origin (e.g. ball clay). 8. Dioxins and PCBs are poorly soluble in water. However, they are adsorbed onto mineral and organic particles suspended in water. The surfaces of oceans, lakes and rivers are exposed to aerial deposition of these compounds which are consequently concentrated along the aquatic food chain. The entry of waste water or contaminated effluents from certain processes, such as chlorine bleaching of paper or pulp and metallurgical processes, can lead to contamination of water and sediment of coastal ocean areas, lakes and rivers. 9. The uptake of dioxins and PCBs by fish occurs via gills and diet. Fish accumulate dioxins and PCBs predominantly in their fatty tissue and liver. Bottom dwelling/bottom feeding fish species are more exposed to contaminated sediments than pelagic fish species. However, levels of dioxins and PCBs in bottom dwelling/bottom feeding fish are not always higher than those in pelagic fish depending on the size, diet and physiological characteristics of the fish. Other factors that may affect accumulation of dioxins and PCBs in fish include age, weight, lipid content or environmental status of their environment. 10. Food of animal origin is the predominant route of human exposure to dioxins and PCBs with approximately 80–90% of the total exposure via fats in fish, meat and dairy products. Levels of dioxins and PCBs in animal fat may be related to contamination of the local environment and to contamination of feed (e.g. fish-oil and fish-meal) or to certain production processes (e.g. artificial drying). -- 2 of 12 -- CXC 62-2006 3 11. The Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) assessed at its 57th meeting in 2002 the toxicity of dioxins and DL-PCBs. The long half-lives of dioxins and DL-PCBs mean that each daily ingestion has a small or even a negligible effect on overall body burden. In order to assess long- or short- term risks to health due to these substances, total or average intake should be assessed over months, and tolerable intake should be assessed over a period of at least 1 month. To encourage this view, the JECFA decided to express the tolerable intake as a monthly value in the form of a provisional tolerable monthly intake (PTMI). A PTMI of 70 pg/kg bw per month for dioxins and DL-PCBs expressed as Toxic Equivalent Factors (TEFs) was derived. JECFA concluded that despite the uncertainties, the intake estimates suggest that a considerable fraction of the population has a long-term mean intake above the PTMI. 12. JECFA assessed at its 80th meeting in 2015 the toxicity of NDL-PCBs. JECFA concluded that none of the available studies on the six indicator PCBs (PCB 28, PCB 52, PCB 101, PCB 138, PCB 153 and PCB 180) and PCB 128 were suitable for derivation of health-based guidance values or for assessment of the relative potency of the NDL-PCBs compared with a reference compound. Therefore, a comparative approach using the minimal effect doses was developed in order to estimate Margins of Exposure (MOEs) to provide guidance on human health risk. 13. JECFA concluded that dietary exposures to NDL-PCBs are unlikely to be of health concern for adults and children, based on the available data. Although the MOEs are lower for breastfed infants, based on current knowledge, the benefits of breastfeeding are considered to outweigh the potential disadvantages that may be associated with the presence of NDL-PCBs in breast milk. 14. In order to reduce the contamination of food from animal origin, control measures at the feed level should be considered. These may involve developing Good Agricultural Practice, Good Animal Feeding Practice (see Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CXC 54-2004)), and Good Manufacturing Practice guidance and measures to effectively reduce dioxins and PCBs in feed, including:  Identification of agricultural areas with increased dioxin and PCB contamination due to local emission, accidents or illegal disposal of contaminated materials, and monitoring of feed and feed ingredients derived from these areas,  Monitoring of dioxin and PCB content of sewage sludge and compost used as fertilizers in agriculture, as well as its compliance with nationally established guideline or maximum levels.  Establishing recommendations for special agricultural use (e.g. limitation of grazing or use of appropriate agricultural techniques),  Identification of possibly contaminated feed and feed ingredients,  Monitoring compliance with nationally-established guideline levels or maximum levels, if available, and minimizing or decontaminating (e.g., refining of fish oil) non-complying feed and feed ingredients, and  Identification and control of critical feed manufacturing processes (e.g. artificial drying by direct heating). 15. Similar control measures, where applicable, should be considered for reducing dioxins and PCBs in food. Transfer of dioxins and PCBs in food producing animals 16. Dioxins and PCBs accumulate in tissues of food-producing animals, including fish. In addition, they can be excreted in fat-containing products such as milk and eggs. There are clear differences in toxicokinetic behaviour between the various dioxin and PCB congeners. 17. For most farm animal species existing studies have shown that dioxins and PCBs are accumulated in body fat and liver, but also excreted into eggs and milk. This excretion contributes to lower accumulation in the body, and decreased levels after termination of the exposure. In growing animals the increase in body fat mass is also an important factor in the tissue levels obtained during exposure, which decreases after termination of the exposure. 18. Factors related to the kinetics of contaminants in the animal may be described by factors like the  transfer rates (TRs) describing the percentage of the ingested contaminant that is excreted in milk or eggs or  bioconcentration factor (BCF), describing the ratio between the level in tissues, milk or eggs, and that in the feed. BCFs are more suitable for tissues, since it is more difficult to obtain the information on the total weight of muscle or adipose tissues in the animal required to calculate the TRs. -- 3 of 12 -- CXC 62-2006 4 19. TRs and BCFs differ for each congener but in practice those for the lower chlorinated and more persistent congeners are more relevant because they contribute most to the TEQ, like PeCDD, 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF, TCDD, TCDF (in the case of chickens) and to a lesser extent the hexachlorinated PCDD/Fs. Only in some cases, like where pentachlorophenol (PCP) is the contamination source, will higher chlorinated congeners like HpCDD make a significant contribution to the toxic equivalency (TEQ) level. In the case of DL-PCBs, PCB-126 and to some extent PCB-169 are the most relevant congeners in terms of contribution to the TEQ levels. 20. PCDD/Fs and PCBs are accumulated to a greater extent in fillet of oily fish (such as salmon and trout) than leaner fish, the latter having higher concentrations of these compounds in the liver tissue. The main feed-related sources of dioxins and DL-PCBs in farmed fish are often fish oil and fishmeal. In addition to the feed composition, the transfer of dioxins and PCBs to fillets depends on other factors such as species, and animal growth and levels of dioxins and DL-PCBs in the environment (water and sediment). Source directed measures 21. Reducing sources of dioxins and PCBs is an essential prerequisite for reduction of contamination. Measures to reduce dioxin emission sources should be directed to reducing the formation of dioxin during thermal processes as well as the application of destruction techniques. Measures to reduce PCBs emission sources should be directed to minimizing releases from existing equipment (e.g. transformers, capacitors), prevention of accidents and better control of the disposal and destruction of PCBs containing oils and wastes. 22. The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (Stockholm Convention) is a global treaty to protect human health and the environment from POPs including dioxins and PCBs. It includes a number of possible source-directed measures that national authorities can consider. 23. Part II of Annex A of the Stockholm Convention lists the following priority measures: (a) with regard to the elimination of the use of PCBs in equipment (e.g. transformers, capacitors or other receptacles containing liquid stocks) by 2025: (i) identify, label and remove from use equipment containing greater than 10% PCBs and volumes greater than 5 litres; (ii) identify, label and remove from use equipment containing greater than 0.05% PCBs and volumes greater than 5 litres; (iii) Endeavour to identify and remove from use equipment containing greater than 0.005% PCBs and volumes greater than 0.05 litres; (b) consistent with the priority measures under a), to reduce exposures and risk to control the use of PCBs: (i) Use only with intact and non-leaking equipment and only in areas where the risk from environmental release can be minimised and quickly remediated; (ii) Do not use in equipment in areas associated with the production or processing of food or feed; (iii) When used in populated areas, including schools and hospitals, all reasonable measures to protect from electrical failure which could result in a fire, and regular inspection of equipment for leaks; (c) that equipment containing PCBs, as described under a) shall not be exported or imported except for the purpose of environmentally sound waste management; (d) Except for maintenance and servicing operations, not allow recovery for the purpose of reuse in other equipment of liquids with polychlorinated biphenyls content above 0.005% (e) Ensure environmentally sound waste management of liquids containing PCBs and equipment contaminated with PCBs having a PCB content above 0.005%, as soon as possible but no later than 2028. (f) Identify other articles containing more than 0.005% PCBs (e.g. cable-sheaths, cured caulk and painted objects) and manage them in an environmentally sound manner. 24. Part II of Annex C of the Stockholm Convention lists the following industrial source categories, that have the potential for comparatively high formation and release of dioxins and PCBs to the environment. (a) Waste incinerators, including co-incinerators of municipal, hazardous or medical waste or of sewage sludge; (b) Cement kilns firing hazardous waste; (c) Production of pulp using elemental chlorine or chemicals generating elemental chlorine for bleaching; (d) Thermal processes in the metallurgical industry, i.e. secondary copper production; sinter plants in the iron and steel industry; secondary aluminium production; secondary zinc production. -- 4 of 12 -- CXC 62-2006 5 25. Part III of Annex C also lists the following source categories that may unintentionally form and release dioxins and PCBs to the environment: (a) Open burning of waste, including burning of landfill sites; (b) Thermal processes in the metallurgic industry not mentioned in Part II, Annex C; (c) Residential combustion sources; (d) Fossil fuel-fired utility and industrial boilers; (e) Firing installations for wood and other biomass fuels; (f) Specific chemical production processes releasing unintentionally formed POPs, especially production of chlorophenols and chloranil; (g) Crematoria; (h) Motor vehicles, particularly those burning leaded gasoline; (i) Destruction of animal carcasses by burning; (j) Textile and leather dyeing (with chloranil) and finishing (with alkaline extraction); (k) Shredder plants for the treatment of end of life vehicles; (l) Smouldering of copper cables; (m) Waste of oil refineries. 26. Adopting technologies