CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF MYCOTOXINS IN SPICES CXC 78-2017 Adopted in 2017. -- 1 of 8 -- CXC 78-2017 2 1. INTRODUCTION The production, processing, packaging and distribution of spices can be very complex. These processes can span long periods of time and possibly include a wide range of establishments. Dried product processing generally involves cleaning (e.g. culling, sorting to remove debris), grading, sometimes soaking, slicing, drying, and on occasion grinding/cracking. Some spices are also treated to mitigate microbial contamination. Processing and packaging/repackaging may also take place in multiple locations over long periods, since spices are prepared for different purposes. A. Objectives The objective of this document is to establish a general code of practice for the prevention and reduction of mycotoxins in spices in order to attain as low as reasonably achievable levelof these toxins by applying specific Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) and Good Storage Practices (GSPs) throughout all the steps in the food chain, thus reducing consumers’ exposure through preventive measures. B. Scope, use and definitions Scope This Code applies to spices - whole, broken, ground or blended. Dried aromatic herbs are not included under the scope of this COP. Use This Code should be used in conjunction with the Code of Hygienic Practice for Low Moisture-Foods (CXC 75- 2015) and its annex on spice and culinary herbs, and other relevant Codex codes of practice. This Code is a recommendation to which producers, transporters, processors and manufacturers in different countries should adhere as far as possible taking into account the local conditions and difficulties in implementation of all the measures specified therein while ensuring the safety of their products in all circumstances. Flexibility in the application of certain requirements of the primary production of spices can be exercised, where necessary, provided that the product will be subjected to control measures sufficient to obtain a safe product. Definitions Spices: dried plants or parts of plants (roots, rhizomes, bulbs, bark, flowers, fruits, and seeds) used in foods for flavouring, colouring, and imparting aroma. The term applies equally to spices in the whole, broken, ground and blended forms, including also spices harvested as dried. Source Plant: plant (non-dried) from which the spice is derived. 2. RECOMMENDED PRACTICES BASED ON GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES (GAP), GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES (GMP) AND GOOD STORAGE PRACTICES (GSP) 2.1 Pre-harvest agricultural conditions Spices are susceptible to contamination by toxigenic fungi in the field, during drying and storage. The use of appropriate GAP to reduce the toxigenic fungi growth and dissemination is recommended. When appropriate, an appropriate crop rotation or sequence is recommended in order to regenerate the soil fertility and reduce the inoculum load of the relevant toxigenic fungi, to minimize the carry-over of mould from one year to the next. It is also appropriate to avoid vicinity of crops which are known to be host plants for Aspergillus flavus, such as maize. Reduction of plant stress using irrigation, fertilization, pruning and pest and disease controlshould be implemented. Insect damage which enhances fungal infection in the vicinity of the crop, can be minimized by proper use of registered insecticides and other appropriate practices within an integrated pest management program. When conditions require, recommended insecticides may be necessary to minimize damage to source plants, which may later favour entry and development of toxigenic fungi; for example, through open galleries made by caterpillars. Weeds around the crop should be controlled by use of mechanical methods or by the use of appropriate registered selective herbicides or other safe and suitable weed eradication practices. Avoiding the use of livestock manure as fertilizer can help control the proliferation of both weeds and toxigenic fungi. It may also be useful to establish an appropriate planting density to further discourage weed proliferation during plant development. -- 2 of 8 -- CXC 78-2017 3 The use of recommended soil fungicides in the process of farm soil preparation may be beneficial to reduce the inoculum load of toxigenic fungi. The presence of debris in bare seed may also provide a vector for fungal infection. At sowing, use disinfected seeds to prevent mould and insects and carefully choose the planting season so that the collection of plants takes place in the driest season. This good practice is essential in areas with a warm and humid climate. The use of fungicides is a very effective practice to prevent fungal growth. However, fungicides must be applied with special care since some of them could lead to the reduction of certain non-toxigenic fungal flora and stimulation of other toxigenic fungi growth. It is recommended that untreated organic waste not be applied to soil as it could allow the proliferation of toxigenic fungi, human pathogens, food spoilage bacteria, and also weed seeds and other unwanted plants. This is particularly important for spices that are swathed rather than straight cut, as rain splash is more likely to contaminate swathed spices. The use of properly treated organic waste (compost) or treated sewage (or biosolids) is encouraged in order to improve soil fertility and increase competitive fungi. Spray irrigation should be avoided during the flowering period for all the spices coming from aerial parts of the plant. This could increase both the rate of normal dispersion of spores and the chances of source plant infection with toxigenic fungi. It is recommended also to avoid flood irrigation because it could spread disease throughout the field. Soil with good drainage must be chosen in order to avoid water logging. It is recommended that diseased and injured plants or parts thereof be removed from the field in order to reduce the inoculum load of toxigenic fungi. 2.2 Post-harvest agricultural conditions 2.2.1 Harvest During the harvesting operation, the moisture content should be determined in each load of the harvested commodity since it affects drying times. To the extent possible, avoid harvesting crops with high moisture content (for instance, due to precipitation or morning dew and/or during late afternoon) as it takes a longer time to dry and increase the likelihood of fungus growth and mycotoxin formation. Mechanical damage of the plant material, a type of stress that occurs during the post-harvest manipulation of crops, which is accompanied by physiological and morphological changes that increase the possibility of subsequent fungal contamination, should be avoided. Spices coming from aerial parts of the plant that have fallen to the ground are known to be exposed to mould growth. Crops that are affected by mould or infected should be removed. Alternatively, the source plant that has fallen to the ground can be collected separately and can be included in the main lot after it has been washed, cleaned, dried and evaluated for contamination. When it is feasible, the soil under the plant should be covered with a clean sheet of plastic during harvest to prevent commodities from getting contaminated by dirt or mixed up with mouldy parts of the plant that have fallen prior to harvesting. It is not applicable to spice rhizomes. Wherever possible a system for differential harvesting should be applied, so that once products are ripe they are harvested. This ensures good quality and helps prevent mould growth and mycotoxin production from overripe crops. In case of harvesting unripe crops, more time is needed to dry than ripe crops. If possible, only the amount that can be processed in a timely manner should be picked in order to minimize growth of toxigenic moulds prior to processing. It is important that the pre- harvest interval advised on the label of the fungicide is observed. Wherever possible, the harvesting procedures implemented each season should be documented by making notes of measurements (e.g. temperature, moisture, and humidity) and any deviation or changes from recommended practices. This information may be very useful for explaining the cause(s) of fungal growth and mycotoxin formation during a particular crop year and may help to avoid similar mistakes in the future. 2.2.2 Drying on the farm The main purpose of the drying operation is to efficiently decrease the high water content of the just harvested spices to a safe level in order to get a stable, safe and good quality product. Drying of crops should begin immediately after harvest and farmers should not hold the crop in piles or in bags for long period of time. When necessary, plastic sheets should be used to cover the crop in the event of rain during the drying process. The drying yard should be located away from contaminant sources such as dusty areas and should receive maximum sun exposure and air circulation, during most of the day, to speed up the drying of the spices. Shady and low areas should be avoided. -- 3 of 8 -- CXC 78-2017 4 The surface for the drying yard should be chosen according to the climate of the region, cost and quality of the dried product, as any type of surface has advantages and disadvantages. Bare soil is not appropriate for rainy areas. Plastic canvas gets humid under the spice layer, promoting fungal growth. In rainy or wet regions spices must be covered and re-spread, once the surface has dried. The pace and total time of the harvest should be based on the available area of the drying yard and the average time necessary for drying, considering both good and bad weather. The following practical measures should be incorporated into the drying process; (a) Dry spices only in thin layers, 3 to 5 cm in depth. In some cases (e.g. low air humidity, good air circulation and sun intensity, or in usually dry regions), thicker layers can be used. (b) Turn over the spice layer constantly during the daytime to allow faster drying, to reduce the risk of fungi growing and help to produce a better quality product. (c) Allow for the appropriate ventilation of the wet spice during the night in order to avoid condensation. (d) Do not mix different types of spices nor spices from different days of harvest. Use a specific identification for each one of them to identify each type of spice and day of harvest. (e) Protect the drying yard area from animals, which can be a source of biological contamination for the drying spice. (f) In order to avoid insect damage during drying, check for the presence of insects and if necessary use integrated pest management in drying yard for the control thereof. (g) Monitor the drying process regularly. Start taking samples from different points of each lot, two or three days before it is expected to be fully dry and continue re-evaluating it daily until it reaches the desired moisture content. Instrumental measurements should be adopted at field level. (h) Avoid rewetting the spices because it favours rapid fungal growth and the possibility of aflatoxin and OTA production. Provide a clear and practical training for drying yard workers, including adequate use of moisture measuring equipment. Repair, clean, protect and keep equipment in a clean storage area until the next season. Moisture measuring equipment should be regularly cross checked and calibrated once a year before harvest In the sun drying process, the product is spread on surfaces such as cement or brick terraces, tarpaulin, plastic canvas, bamboo and sisal mats, raised tables covered in wire mesh or fish farm netting (paragraphs 49 and 55.1a also apply on the farm). The drying process can be divided into three stages. In each stage, aflatoxin and OTA producing fungi will have varying opportunities for growth: (a) At the first stage, there is a slight decrease in moisture content. The high moisture content (aw> 0.95) provides unsuitable conditions for aflatoxin and OTA producing fungi to grow. However, other microorganisms, such as other hydrophilic fungi (yeasts and moulds) and bacteria, may spoil the product if it is kept too long at aw> 0.95 after harvest. (b) The second stage is the one of maximum loss in moisture content. During this stage (aw lower than 0.95 but higher than 0.80), there are favourable conditions for aflatoxin and OTA producing fungi to grow and therefore it is necessary to implement precautionary measures as recommended in paragraphs 28 to 33. (c) The third stage which starts at aw 0.80, is much drier compared to the previous two stages. There is a slower slight decrease in the remaining moisture content. Conditions at this stage do not favour the growth of aflatoxin and OTA producing fungi. Therefore the most important point is to control the period of time in which the spices remain in the drying yard, in the range of water activity where aflatoxin and OTA-producing fungi can grow (aw 0.8–0.95). Five days or less in the drying yard is enough and effective to prevent aflatoxin and OTA accumulation. In general, a maximum aw of 0.65 is sufficient for protecting spices from damage by fungi. 2.2.3 Transport Containers and transportation devices (e.g. wagons, trucks) to be used for collecting and transporting the harvested commodity from the field to drying and storage facilities after drying, should be clean, dry and free of crop residues, old plants, plant dust, insects and visible fungal growth before use and re-use. -- 4 of 8 -- CXC 78-2017 5 Harvested commodities that have not been dried to a safe storage moisture level at farm level should not be stored, but shall be transported to a processing plant to be dried without delay.. When necessary, it is recommended that the trucks and containers should allow appropriate aeration and minimize the condensation effects, under conditions protected from rain (e.g. lateral openings). 2.2.4 Storage (source plant) Fresh material for spices or source plants should be processed as quickly as possible. Avoid storage of source plants as any period of storage (in a bag or in a pile) increases the likelihood of mould growth. Wherever possible, start drying on the day of harvesting. Source plants should be packed in bags made of porous material such as jute bags or woven plastic bags. Avoid non-porous plastic bags for packing of dried products. Gunny bags should be stored off the floor (on pallets) and away from the walls (at least 30 cm) so that any potential condensation does not cause the product to become wet and to avoid the chance of moisture entering through the wall. Internal walls, floor surfaces, the junctions of the floor with the walls and the junctions between two walls should be made with a smooth, water-proof, non-absorbent, washable and non-toxic material. Control of insect and rodent activity and maintenance of appropriate moisture levels and temperature in the storage room is ess