CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE PREVENTION OR REDUCTION OF CIGUATERA POISONING CXC 83-2024 Adopted in 2024 -- 1 of 13 -- CXC 83-2024 2 1. INTRODUCTION Ciguatoxins (CTXs) are a class of toxins produced by marine dinoflagellates (motile unicellular algae). These toxins enter the marine food web when CTX-containing dinoflagellates/algae are consumed by herbivorous fish or shellfish, including some echinoderms. CTXs can bioaccumulate in these and higher trophic level marine organisms. Ciguatera poisoning (CP) is an illness resulting from consumption of marine organisms containing toxic levels of CTXs. Sub-chronic exposure to ciguatoxic fish or shellfish can also lead to toxic effects. CP has become a global health concern and is increasing in prevalence due to factors that likely include climate change. Coastal communities that rely on local fishing as a food supply and as a source of income are particularly at risk from increasing occurrences of CP. In 2018, FAO and WHO convened a joint expert meeting to perform an evaluation of CTX and provide guidance for development of risk management option.1 The benthic dinoflagellate genus Gambierdiscus is the main known producer of CTXs, and some species of Fukuyoa may also produce CTX-like toxins. These dinoflagellates tend to grow in tropical and subtropical marine environments and are typically associated with coral reefs. Gambierdiscus and Fukuyoa are known to attach to various substrates (e.g. turf algae, macroalgae, and coral, although they can also be detected in the water column). Recent reports have identified these organisms in more temperate regions as well, including the Republic of Korea, Japan, northern territories of New Zealand, southern Australia, the northern Gulf of Mexico, and the Mediterranean Sea. CTXs were initially categorized as belonging to one of three major classes that corresponded with their global location (Pacific P-CTXs, Caribbean C-CTXs and Indian Ocean I-CTXs); however, experts now recommend that toxins be categorized into four classes, derivatives of CTX4A, CTX3C, C-CTX, and I-CTX, according to their chemical structure (I-CTX structures have not been fully determined). CTXs are lipophilic, do not degrade under heat or mild pH changes, and are known to be resistant to degradation by cooking, freezing, or canning processes. They may undergo structural transformations as they are metabolized by marine organisms, often increasing in toxicity as they do so. More than 30 unique analogues of CTXs have been reported and many more have yet to be fully characterized. The impact of CTXs to humans is primarily through the consumption of wild-caught herbivorous fish or predatory fish or shellfish that have accumulated CTXs. The risk of intoxication from aquacultured fish is considered to be low. The diet of the individual marine organism is the primary contributing factor for CTX accumulation; however, the size and age of marine organisms are believed to influence CTX accumulation as well. CTXs are lipophilic and may be present in tissues such as meat (flesh), head, liver, viscera, and roe (eggs). The FAO/WHO Report of the Expert Meeting on Ciguatera Poisoning1 referenced more than 425 species of fish that have been identified as having been contaminated with CTXs, including examples such as barracuda, amberjack, grouper, snapper, and parrotfish. Many of these fish are territorial, which can help identify vulnerable fishing areas, though territories can overlap and change with time. CTXs do not appear to be fatal to fish and there are no outward signs that a wild-caught fish is contaminated with CTXs, such as change in behaviour, taste, odour, or texture; meaning that toxin analysis is required to confirm CTX presence and concentration. Humans can experience CP when they consume fish or other marine organisms contaminated with CTXs. Generally, the signs and symptoms of CP are acute and can appear within several hours of consuming contaminated food or up to 48 hours after consumption. CP symptoms include gastrointestinal issues (e.g. vomiting, diarrhoea), neurological issues (e.g. paraesthesia, headaches), cardiovascular issues (e.g. hypotension, bradycardia), and some symptoms that are especially characteristic of CP, such as cold allodynia and dysesthesia. CP is rarely fatal, but exposure to CTXs may prove extremely debilitating and can exacerbate the impact of pre-existing cardiovascular or neurological conditions. There is no specific treatment for CP, but some symptoms can be managed if the illness has been correctly diagnosed. Reports of CP have been made since the 1500s. At present, CP is believed to be the most common type of marine biotoxin-related food poisoning worldwide. The global prevalence of CP is estimated to be 10 000 to 500 000 cases per year. In general, CP prevalence may be underestimated due to a lack of mandatory incidence reporting, misidentification of CP symptoms, limited collection of epidemiological data on a global level, and other reasons. If clinicians do not know the characteristic symptoms, they may misdiagnose CP, leading to underreporting of the disease. -- 2 of 13 -- CXC 83-2024 3 Consuming CTX-contaminated fish was once geographically limited to local residents and visitors to tropical and subtropical regions with suitable coral reef habitats, but global trade of fish and the impacts of climate change, including an increase in ocean temperature, prevalence of cyclones, and changes in currents, have caused CP illnesses to be observed among a wider range of individuals and reported in non-CTX endemic countries in temperate regions. Analogues of CTXs that were formerly found to be endemic to specific regions can now be found in other areas of the world. Some regions have been monitoring CP cases for many years, developing expertise in analysis and area management, and some are experiencing an increase in CP as an emerging issue and must learn how to develop monitoring programs, inspection protocols, and regulations to protect the public. Successful surveillance and monitoring of CTXs depends on the availability of accurate epidemiological data and/or analytical methods validated according to international standards/guidelines. Presently, formal validation of analytical methods for CTXs is limited due to the lack of certified standards and certified or uncertified matrix reference materials. The analytical methods currently available for detection of CTXs are diverse and target different properties of the toxins (e.g. structure, cytotoxicity) and encompass both screening and quantitative measurements. Some analytical methods can simultaneously quantify individual CTX analogues, while others are more selective in the analogues that can be detected. However, there are no internationally agreed harmonized protocols to determine CTXs. Most CTX detection methods are suitable for analysing a variety of matrices (i.e. algae or seafood tissues) and some have sufficient sensitivity to detect CTXs at the levels that may be associated with adverse health effects in humans. CTX analogues are believed to vary depending on the species of toxin-producing algae, as well as the metabolism of marine organisms. CTXs can be extracted from CTX-producing algae or contaminated marine organisms; a limited number of CTX analogues have been synthesized (e.g. CTX1B, CTX3C, and 51-hydroxy-CTX3C). The dinoflagellates grow slowly in laboratory conditions and can be difficult to maintain; large quantities of ciguatoxic fish material are required for the isolation of toxins, which means production of CTX standards is limited. However, recent advancements in culturing, materials handling, and chemical characterization have significantly improved the capabilities to make reference materials. Toxins from cultured algae and fish with varying metabolite profiles are available. In their 2020 report, FAO/WHO concluded that “effective and integrated risk management options would require definition of toxin profiles in each region, both in algal strains and in seafood to define risk evaluation protocols […] conclusions should be considered as of local or regional significance only […]” Some of the recommendations from the FAO/WHO report are included in the “Recommended Practices” sections below. 2. SCOPE This document provides guidance on recommended practices to prevent or reduce CP for different types of stakeholders including competent authorities, fish sector operators (fishers, seafood processors, and seafood retail workers), health care professionals, and consumers. Because of differences in CTXs, analytical methods and standards, and regional prevalence levels of CP, not all recommended practices will be applicable in all situations or to all stakeholders. 3. DEFINITIONS  Analogue: A compound that has a structure similar to another compound but differs from it in certain components, such as functional groups or substructures. When referring to CTX, analogues have similar backbone structures but different functional groups in specific locations.  Ciguatoxic: Containing toxic levels of CTXs.  CTX-contaminated: Containing levels of CTX which may or may not be considered toxic.  Fish sector operators: People who work in the areas of fishing, seafood processing, and seafood retail.  Sentinel species: An organism used to detect existing or emerging health hazards from the environment. Sentinel species are sensitive indicators of a chemical contaminant in the environment due to their ability to concentrate or integrate exposures within a food web or ecosystem, and they may provide early indication of potential adverse health effects and provide insight into toxic mechanisms of a given hazardous agent.  Surrogate: a substitute species used to assess the quality of the environment when testing the target species is not feasible. In this case, testing of sentinel fish or water may be preferable to testing fish for consumption when determining if an area should be restricted to fishing. -- 3 of 13 -- CXC 83-2024 4 4. RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 4.1 Government-sponsored surveillance and monitoring programs As knowledge improves and reliable methods become available, competent authorities should consider establishing or strengthening programs to monitor outbreaks and CTXs in algae, sentinel fish species, and fish for consumption. Overall, the function of monitoring programs is to provide information that may be used to develop warnings of the potential for CP problems and provide feedback notices to the fishing industry or consumers to warn against fishing in certain areas. It is currently impractical (i.e. costly and labour-intensive) to test fish to a sufficient degree for the complete prevention of CP, but recommendations outlined below should help to reduce the prevalence of CP. Environmental monitoring may be undertaken with a two-tiered approach: initial test of Gambierdiscus or Fukuyoa algae or fish using a functional biological screening method, then confirmation of any positive results using a chemical analytical method to identify well- known toxins and determine CTX content. Local officials should determine if there are sentinel species of fish that consume toxic algae and whether monitoring those fish as well as predatory fish that feed on affected fish in the area is appropriate. A non-exhaustive list of fish known or suspected to be associated with CP is included as Annex I. This list is provided as an example to users of the Code of Practice (CoP). Competent authorities should define the causative organisms of CTX in their region. Monitoring of algae in the local region can be used to positively identify blooms of Gambierdiscus or Fukuyoa and characterize their toxin content when present in sufficient quantity. Passive sampling of toxins in the water column by Solid Phase Adsorption Toxin Tracking (SPATT) devices containing lipophilic resins can be used to collect toxins from water and have the potential to serve as an early warning tool but are not used routinely for CTX monitoring. More details on analyzing benthic algae are presented in the Analytical Methods section below. Monitoring of both algae and fish is recommended, as the concentration and/or CTX profile of benthic dinoflagellates does not always correlate to contamination in fish; i.e. a high concentration of CTX in an algal bloom may not correlate to a high concentration of CTX in local fish, and certain species of fish may contain high concentrations of CTXs even though the density of dinoflagellates in the sea water is low. This relationship has been used by some competent authorities to set limits on size or species of fish permitted for consumption from a particular region. Because toxin profiles typically differ in algae versus contaminated fish and humans (due to metabolism and behavior, for instance large migratory species that can feed in other areas), it is important to experimentally determine the correlation between environmentally sampled toxins and toxins isolated from fish and humans to enable traceback and targeted surveillance activities. It may be possible to identify the preferred substrate for dinoflagellates (e.g. seagrass and macroalgae) and if there is a selectivity or preference by herbivores for consumption of those substrates in a region. Competent authorities could consider developing maps based on epidemiological data and identified prevalence of Gambierdiscus and Fukuyoa species in a region, and the associated food chains for toxin transfer in those areas. These maps may be useful to competent authorities when trying to determine if an area needs to be closed to commercial, subsistence, and recreational fishing. Maps indicating toxic fish or algae should be updated at reasonable intervals as blooms or migratory patterns may change season-to- season or with climate change, and results can be more precise as testing methods improve. Creating high-risk maps may not be appropriate for all regions, e.g. it may be difficult for countries or regions with many islands and coral reefs because high-risk areas are variable. A more complex map could include information on the temporal and geographic toxin profiles of CTXs in the local area for both algae and fish. It may be possible to use information on the migratory patterns of reef fish (i.e. species of fish that migrate from an area with low Gambierdiscus or Fukuyoa density to one of high density) and the temporal swings in toxicity of the area and correlate them to possible toxin load, but this has not yet been practically demonstrated. Competent authorities should consider developing and routinely updating an epidemiological database to collect information on human illnesses, which includes the species of the fish suspected of causing the illness and its original catch area if known (for countries reporting CP). Ideally, the data collected by these programs should include the origin and date of capture of contaminated fish,