1 Adopted 2009. CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF OCHRATOXIN A CONTAMINATION IN COFFEE CXC 69-2009 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Ochratoxin A (OTA) is a toxic fungal metabolite classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as a possible human carcinogen (group 2B). JECFA established a PTWI of 100ng/kg bodyweight for OTA. In recognition of this global concern, FAO developed the Guidelines for the Prevention of Mould Formation in Coffee (2006) as a strategy to enable coffee producing countries to develop and implement their own national programmes for the prevention and reduction of OTA contamination. OTA is produced by a few species in the genera Aspergillus and Penicillium. In coffee, only Aspergillus species, specifically A. ochraceus and related species (A. westerdijkiae and A. steynii), A. niger and related species, and A. carbonarius are involved. OTA is produced when conditions of water activity, nutrition and temperature required for growth and biosynthesis are present. 2. The main commercial coffee varieties produced and traded are Coffea arabica (arabica coffee) and Coffea canephora (robusta coffee). 3. After harvest, the crop is sorted, dried (as cherries or as beans), stored and traded. The moisture content of the beans is reduced to a maximum of 12.5% to prevent OTA production. 2. DEFINITIONS (BASED ON ISO 3509) Parts of the coffee fruit, undried (Figure 1) Coffee Cherry: fresh, complete fruit of the coffee tree. Bean, fresh bean: endosperm (seed) of the coffee fruit. There are generally two beans per fruit. Endocarp: scientific term for 'parchment'. The tough integument tightly pressed to the seed when fresh but from which the seed shrinks during drying. Endosperm: scientific term designating the tissues that feed the embryo during germination, the bean consists of the endosperm and embryo, i.e., the material inside the developing -- 1 of 18 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 2 fruit which ultimately forms the coffee beans. The endosperm fills the integument as the coffee cherry ripens. Epicarp or Exocarp: scientific word designating the skin of the fruit, a mono cellular layer covered with a waxy substance ensuring protection of the fruit. Floating (or floats) coffee: cherry coffee of low density, buoyant in water. Mesocarp: intermediate layer of tissues between the epicarp and the endocarp (parchment). It consists mainly of pectinaceous mucilage and pulp. Mucilage: common word to describe the slimy layer found between the pulp and adhering to the parchment inside a coffee cherry, but not removed by pulping. Not present in unripe and overripe coffee. Naked beans or endosperm: parchment coffee that has been partly or entirely peeled of its parch during pulping and/or washing. Pulp: part of the coffee cherry composed of the external exocarp and most of the internal mesocarp (mucilaginous tissue). Parts of the coffee fruit, dried Bean in parchment: coffee bean entirely or partially enclosed in its parchment (endocarp, pergamino). Coffee bean: commercial term designating the dried seed of the coffee plant. Defects: the general term for common undesirable particles, which can include various types of beans, parts of beans, fruit tissue and foreign matter, found in green and roasted coffee beans. Diverse and specific terms, according to the producing country, are used to describe the defects. The fruit defects are generally caused by faulty processing, pest damage, or adverse climatic conditions. Defects receive specific weight values to assist in the classification and grading of coffee lots under various national and international systems. Natural coffee, dried coffee cherry, coco: dried fruit of the coffee tree, comprising its external envelops and one or more beans. Green coffee bean: the dried seed of the coffee plant, separated from non-food tissues of the fruit. -- 2 of 18 -- OCHRATOXIN A CONTAMINATION IN COFFEE (CXC 69-2009) 3 Hull, dried parchment: dried endocarp of the coffee fruit. Husk, dried cherry pulp: assembled external envelopes (pericarp) of the dried coffee fruit. Parchment (or Parch) or endocarp: the coffee fruit endocarp located between the fleshy part (pulp) and the silver skin. It is a thin, crumbly paper-like covering left on wet- processed beans after pulping and fermentation, removed during hulling. Silverskin, dried testa, dried seed perisperm: coat of the coffee bean. It has generally a silvery or coppery appearance. Washed and cleaned coffee: dry processed green coffee from which the silverskin has been removed by mechanical means in the presence of water. Processes Splitting of cherry: a variation of dry processing wherein the cherry is mechanically split open and the fruit and seeds maintained together in a mass. Gleaning (or Sweeping): coffee fruit found lying on the ground beneath coffee bushes, detached during harvest or abscised during development. Selection: technological operation intended to eliminate foreign matter (e.g. stones, twigs, leaves) and to sort coffee cherries according to size, density and degree of maturity. Dry process: treatment of coffee cherries consisting in drying them, either under sunlight or in drying machines, to give husk coffee. This is usually followed by mechanical removal of the dried pericarp (husk) to produce “natural” green coffee. Dehusking: mechanical removal of the husks (pericarp) from dry coffee cherries. Wet process: treatment of coffee cherries consisting of the mechanical removal of the exocarp (pulp) in the presence of water, alternatively followed by – either removal of the mucilage (mesocarp) by fermentation or other methods, followed by washing to give parchment coffee, or – direct drying of the pulped beans within their mucilaginous parchment, followed by hulling to produce “semi-washed” green coffee. Removal of the mucilage is usually followed by drying and hulling to produce “washed” green coffee. -- 3 of 18 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 4 Pulping: technological operation used in the wet process to remove the pulp (exocarp) and as much as possible of the mucilage (mesocarp) by mechanical means. A portion of the mucilaginous mesocarp usually remains adhering to the parchment (endocarp). Fermentation process: treatment intended to digest the mucilaginous mesocarp adhering to the parchment of the pulped coffee, allowing its elimination by washing. The fermentation process can be replaced by a mechanical demucilaging system to remove the mucilage by friction. Washing: technological operation intended to remove by water all traces of the mucilaginous mesocarp from the surface of the parchment. Drying of parchment coffee: technological operation to reduce the moisture content of parchment coffee to a level that allows hulling under satisfactory technical conditions and that will not be detrimental to further storage of the coffee. Hulling: removal of the dried endocarp of parchment coffee to produce green coffee. Polishing: technological operation to remove the residual silverskin (perisperm) from green coffee by purely mechanical means. Sorting: technological operation intended to remove foreign matter, fragments of coffee and defective beans from green coffee. Roasting: heat treatment that produces fundamental chemical and physical changes in the structure and composition of green coffee, bringing about darkening of the beans and the development of the characteristic flavour of roasted coffee. 3. PROCESSING OF COFFEE CHERRIES 4. Coffee cherries are processed under two basic systems (Figures 2 and 3): a) the dry processing system which produces what is called natural coffee or dried coffee cherry (the seed is enclosed in the whole fruit) and b) the wet processing system, that generates what is called parchment coffee, where the seed is enclosed in the inner integument or endocarp. 5. In the dry processing of natural coffee, the whole fruit is either directly sun dried, on bare soil, bricks, tiles, concrete or even asphalt, or dried using a combination of sun and mechanical drying (particularly on more technologically advanced farms). -- 4 of 18 -- OCHRATOXIN A CONTAMINATION IN COFFEE (CXC 69-2009) 5 6. In wet processing, the fruit parts are mechanically separated, giving the pulp as by- product and the parchment as the main product. The latter is coated with mucilage, which can be degraded by fermentation and then washed or mechanically removed directly, without fermentation. After removing or not removing the mucilage, the parchment is usually sun dried, in a drying yard, or on suspended tables with many variations and technological innovations. Sun and mechanical drying can be combined and used together. 7. After processing, the dried coffee can be stored, separated from the fruit tissues by hulling and passed through sizing (grading), sorting, polishing, cleaning and bagging, before being sold. 8. Coffee roasting can remove a very significant percentage of OTA. Depending on the roasting process, 65 to 100% reduction of OTA can be achieved. 9. While this code of practices is focused on the reduction of OTA contamination, which is the primary food safety issue in the production of green coffee bean, industry food safety programmes must also effectively manage other potential hazards associated with the production, processing and handling of coffee. 4. RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 4.1 Pre-harvest 10. It is not certain whether OTA-producing fungi can infect coffee fruits and grow to produce OTA still on the plant. It is possible that infection on the plant may involve two different contamination routes: either through the flowers without visible sign, or by insect invasion such as the coffee berry borer (CBB) (Hypothenemus hampei), that can carry spores to the fruit by making holes in the cherries and one or more tunnels in the beans leaving visible signs. 11. Recommended practices to reduce the development and spore load from OTA-producing fungi on coffee plants and beans are: a) Keep coffee plants vigorous, through the regular use of good agricultural practices (GAP) at the proper time, such as weeding, improving soil texture, pruning, fertilization, pest and disease control, and irrigation. b) Do not use overhead irrigation during the flowering period. This could augment normal spore dispersal rates and increase the chance of infection of beans by OTA producers. c) Use traps (such as alcohol traps) for Hypothenemus hampei control before harvesting, and encourage the use of the integrated pest management (IPM) programme. -- 5 of 18 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 6 d) Avoid disposal of uncomposted organic wastes, from coffee or any other source, in or around the plantation. Coffee seeds and seed-associated material, such as dust, earth, parchment and other seed processing residues, can allow proliferation of OTA producing fungi. 4.2 Harvesting 12. The harvesting method chosen on any farm is a conjunction of the requirements of the processing method, economic considerations and labour availability. 13. Four basic harvesting systems are known: (i) single-pass stripping, where all branches bearing fruit are harvested at once; (ii) multi-pass stripping, where only branches bearing mainly ripe cherries are harvested; (iii) multi-pass selective picking (finger picking), where only ripe cherries are harvested and (iv) mechanical harvesting, where different types of machines are used to harvest fruit all at once. 14. Besides these basic main harvest systems, additional procedures can be used, such as a ‘fly harvest’ to collect prematurely ripe fruit or the collection (gleaning or sweeping) of cherries that fall on the ground or are left on the plants during harvest. In general, berries that fall onto the ground should not be collected, particularly in humid conditions, as fungal growth may occur, which can give rise to OTA contamination. However, brief contact with the ground is not problematic but can become so if the contact period lengthens. In wet or humid climates, only collection from the ground on the same day should be considered acceptable. If it is necessary to harvest beans that have fallen onto the ground, these should be stored separately until they are processed, to avoid the risk of contaminating the rest of the crop. Care should be taken to ensure that any fallen berries that are collected are rapidly subjected to the processing and drying stages, as these commodities may have a higher likelihood of fungal growth. 15. The harvest should be started as soon as there are sufficient ripe cherries for it to be economically viable. When the right time to commence harvest is decided, the following should first be carried out: a) Remove weeds, fallen cherries and brush from the proximity of the trees before harvest. b) Where possible, place mats, canvas or tarpaulins beneath the trees to prevent contamination by old fallen cherries. c) Ensure that there are adequate arrangements for the subsequent storage and processing of the crop, so that conditions favour mould growth or other damage are avoided. -- 6 of 18 -- OCHRATOXIN A CONTAMINATION IN COFFEE (CXC 69-2009) 7 16. Coffee cherries should be processed as soon as possible after harvesting. The harvesting rate, processing performance and labour availability must follow the pace of the drying rate. 17. Coffee ready to be processed should be uniform and not of mixed categories i.e. wet with dry coffee in dry processing or pulpable with not pulpable in wet processing. Prior to processing low quality cherries (e.g. unripe or overripe fruit, or fruit that has coffee berry disease) should be removed. This can be done either by visual sorting, or via water separation. It should be ensured that any material that is out sorted is disposed of in an appropriate manner. 4.3 Post-harvest 18. Senescence and changes follow once coffee fruit is detached from the plant. The post harvest period is characterized by initial, transitional and final phases. 19. The initial or high moisture phase starts with harvest. The product is then in an unstable state, and spoilage can be controlled through competitor microrganisms, restricting oxygen and reducing the time which is critical in this state. In wet processing the high moisture phase may be extended and controlled through fermentation, but it is desirable to reduce this time. 20. The transitional phase is the least stable and most difficult to predict, when spoilage can only be controlled by time limitation. Mesophilic and xerophilic spoilage microrganisms have enough water to grow but not their hydrophilic competitors. Turning or stirring of the coffee is essential to promote uniform drying. When harvest coincides with a rainy or high humidity season, measures to optimize drying must be adopted. 21. The final or low moisture phase starts at the end of drying and continues until roasting. The product is in a