CXC 30-1983 Page 1 of 14 Adopted 1983. Editorial corrections 2011. CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR THE PROCESSING OF FROG LEGS CXC 30-1983 1. SECTION I - SCOPE This Code of Hygienic Practice applies to frog legs derived from edible frogs. It contains the minimum requirements of hygiene in the production, processing, handling, packing, storage, transportation and distribution of frog legs to ensure a healthful and wholesome supply of this product. 2. SECTION II - DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this Code the following expressions have the meaning stated: 2.1 Chilling means the process of cooling to a temperature approaching that of melting ice; 2.2 Contamination means occurrence of any objectionable matter in the product. 2.3 Disinfection means the reduction, without adversely affecting the food, by means of hygienically satisfactory chemical agents and/or physical methods, of the number of microorganisms to a level that will not lead to harmful contamination of food. 2.4 Establishment means any building(s) or area(s) in which food is handled after harvesting and the surroundings under the control of the same management. 2.5 Fresh frog legs means the skinless hind legs of freshly killed frogs. 3. SECTION III - HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS IN PRODUCTION/HARVESTING AREA 3.1 Environmental Hygiene in Areas from which Frog Legs are Obtained 3.1.1 Protection from contamination by wastes. Frogs should be protected in so far as practicable from contamination with human, animal, domestic, industrial and agricultural wastes and adequate precautions should be taken to ensure that these wastes are not used or disposed of in a manner which may constitute a health hazard through the food. 3.1.2 Pest and disease control. Control measures involving treatment with chemical, physical or biological agents should only be undertaken by or under direct supervision of personnel who have a thorough understanding of the potential hazards to health, particularly those which may arise from residues in the food. Such measures should only be carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the official agency having jurisdiction. 3.1.3 Harvest areas. The environment where frogs are caught or collected should be protected in so far as practicable against contamination which may constitute a health hazard to the consumer through the product. -- 1 of 14 -- CXC 30-1983 Page 2 of 14 3.2 Harvesting and Production 3.2.1 Techniques 3.2.1.1 Methods and procedures associated with harvesting and production should be hygienic and such as not to constitute a potential health hazard or result in contamination of the product. 3.2.1.2 To prevent deterioration in the quality of frog legs, it is essential that steps should be taken to prevent the live frogs from: (i) injury or bruising of the flesh during catching, for example, from use of unsuitable equipment; (ii) contamination with dirt or any other extraneous matter; (iii) exposure to unfavourable temperatures; and (iv) rough handling, such as improper stacking of containers. 3.2.1.3 Harvesting should be carried out under conditions of minimal stress, such as proper fill to avoid overloading containers. 3.2.2 Equipment and product containers. Equipment and containers used for harvesting should be so constructed and maintained as not to constitute a hazard to health. Containers which are re-used should be of such material and construction as will permit easy and thorough cleaning. They should maintained clean and, where necessary, disinfected. Containers used for toxic materials should not subsequently be used for holding foods or food ingredients. 3.2.3 Removal of obviously unfit raw materials. Unfit frogs, for example those less active, that are injured or have blood clots or parasites in the flesh, should be segregated during collection to the fullest extent practicable prior to delivery to the processing plant. Similarly, on arrival, unfit frogs should be removed as soon as possible and segregated for disposal in an appropriate manner. Arrangements for removal and segregation should be approved by the official agency having jurisdiction. 3.2.4 Protection against contamination and damage. Suitable precautions should be taken to protect the frogs from being contaminated by animals, insects, vermin, birds, chemicals or microbiological contaminants or other objectionable substances during handling and storage. 3.3 Storage at the Place of Production/harvesting. Frogs that are stored alive should be kept alive in a sanitary environment until they are processed. Frogs that die, become weak or appear abnormal in any way should be immediately removed from the live store and discarded. 3.4 Transportation 3.4.1 Conveyances for transporting the harvested frogs from the production area or place of harvest or storage should be adequate for the purpose intended and should be of such material and construction as will permit easy and thorough cleaning. They should be maintained clean, and where necessary disinfected. -- 2 of 14 -- CXC 30-1983 Page 3 of 14 3.4.2 All handling procedure should be such as will prevent raw materials from being contaminated. Care should be taken keep the frogs alive, to protect against contamination and to minimize damage and stress. Special equipment - such as refrigeration equipment - should be used if distances involved so indicate. If ice is used in contact with the product it should be of the quality required in paragraph 4.4.1.2. 3.5 Cutting Stations. In butchering and cutting carried out at collection points or cutting centres away from the main processing plant, facilities and operating practices should comply with all applicable requirements contained in Sections 4, 5, 6 and 7, particularly Sub-Section 7.4.1 involving slaughter, cutting and de-skinning. 4. SECTION IV - ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES 4.1 Location Establishments should be located in areas which are free from objectionable odours, smoke, dust or other contaminants and are not subject to flooding. 4.2 Roadways and Areas used by Wheeled Traffic serving the establishment which are within its boundaries or in its immediate vicinity should have a hard paved surface suitable for wheeled traffic. There should be adequate drainage and provision should be made to allow for cleaning. 4.3 Buildings and Facilities 4.3.1 Buildings and facilities should be of sound construction and maintained in good repair. 4.3.2 Adequate working space should be provided to allow for satisfactory performance of all operations. 4.3.3 The design should be such as to permit easy and adequate cleaning and to facilitate proper supervision of food hygiene. 4.3.4 The buildings and facilities should be designed to prevent the entrance and harbouring of pests and the entry of environmental contaminants such as smoke, dust, etc. 4.3.5 Separation of processes. Buildings and facilities should be designed to provide separation, by partition, location or other effective means, between those operations which may cause cross-contamination. 4.3.5.1 Any plant producing food not intended for human consumption should be entirely separate from a plant which is processing frog legs for human consumption. Processing of by-products not intended for human consumption should be conducted in separate buildings or in areas which are physically separated to prevent any possible contamination of frog legs. 4.3.6 Buildings and facilities should be designed to facilitate hygienic operations by means of a regulated flow in the process from the arrival of the raw material at the premises to the finished product without overcrowding of equipment and personnel, and should provide for appropriate temperature conditions for the process and the product. 4.3.7 In food handling areas: -- 3 of 14 -- CXC 30-1983 Page 4 of 14 Floors where appropriate, should be of water-proof, non-absorbent, washable, non-slip and non-toxic materials, without crevices, and should be easy to clean and disinfect. Where appropriate, floors should slope sufficiently for liquids to drain to trapped outlets. Walls where appropriate, should be of water-proof, non-absorbent, washable and non-toxic materials and should be light-coloured. Up to a height appropriate for the operation, they should be smooth and without crevices, and should be easy to clean and disinfect. Where appropriate angles between walls and floors, and between walls and ceilings should be sealed and coved to facilitate cleaning. Ceilings should be so designed, constructed and finished as to prevent the accumulation of dirt and minimize condensation, mould development and flaking and should be easy to clean. Windows and other openings should be so constructed as to avoid accumulation of dirt and those which open should be fitted with screens. Screens should be easily movable for cleaning and kept in good repair. Internal window sills, if present, should be sloped to prevent use as shelves. Doors should have smooth, non-absorbent surfaces and, where appropriate, be self-closing and close fitting. Stairs, lift cages and auxiliary structures such as platforms, ladders, chutes, should be so situated and constructed as not to cause contamination to food. Chutes should be constructed with inspection and cleaning hatches. 4.3.8 In food handling areas all overhead structures and fittings should be installed in such a manner as to avoid contamination directly or indirectly of food and raw materials by condensation and drip, and should not hamper cleaning operations. They should be insulated where appropriate and be so designed and finished as to prevent the accumulation of dirt and to minimize condensation, mould development and flaking. They should be easy to clean. 4.3.9 Living quarters, toilets and areas where animals are kept should be completely separated from and should not open directly on to food handling areas. 4.3.10 Where appropriate, establishments should be so designed that access can be controlled. 4.3.11 The use of material which cannot be adequately cleaned and disinfected, such as wood, should be avoided unless its use would clearly not be a source of contamination. 4.3.12 Adequate facilities should be available to maintain frog legs in a chilled condition, as required. 4.3.13 Refrigeration and freezing equipment should be properly designed and constructed to accomplish rapid freezing and should be of adequate capacity. 4.3.14 Freezer and cold storage facilities should be adequate for the intended production and should be fitted with automatic temperature controlling and recording devices. 4.4 Hygienic Facilities 4.4.1 Water supply -- 4 of 14 -- CXC 30-1983 Page 5 of 14 4.4.1.1 An ample supply of potable water under adequate pressure and of suitable temperature should be available with adequate facilities for its storage, where necessary, and distribution, and with adequate protection against contamination and pollution. The standards of potability should not be less than those contained in the latest edition of "International Standards of Drinking Water" (WHO). 4.4.1.2 Ice should be made from potable water and should be manufactured, handled and stored so as to protect it from contamination. 4.4.1.3 Steam used in direct contact with food or food contact surfaces should not contain any substances which may be hazardous to health or may contaminate the food. 4.4.1.4 Non-potable water should be carried in completely separate lines, identifiable preferably by colour, and used for steam production, refrigeration, fire control and other similar purposes not connected with food with no cross-connection with or back-siphonage into the system carrying potable water. 4.4.2 Effluent and waste disposal. Establishments should have an efficient effluent and waste disposal system which should at all times be maintained in good order and repair. All effluent lines (including sewer systems) should be large enough to carry peak loads and should be so constructed as to avoid contamination of potable water supplies. 4.4.3 Changing facilities and toilets. Adequate, suitable and conveniently located changing facilities and toilets should be provided in all establishments. Toilets should be so designed as to ensure hygienic removal of waste handled. These areas should be well lit, ventilated and where appropriate heated and should not open directly on to food handling areas. Hand washing facilities with warm or hot and cold water, a suitable hand-cleaning disinfectant and with suitable hygienic means of drying hands, should be provided adjacent to toilets and in such a position that the employee must pass them when returning to the processing area. Where hot and cold water are available mixing taps should be provided. Where paper towels are used, a sufficient number of dispensers and receptacles should be provided near to each washing facility. Taps of a non-hand operable type are desirable. Notices should be posted directing personnel to wash their hands after using the toilet. 4.4.4 Hand washing facilities in processing areas. Adequate and conveniently located facilities for hand washing and drying should be provided wherever the process demands. Where appropriate, facilities for hand disinfection should also be provided. Warm or hot and cold water and suitable hand cleaning preparations should be provided. Where hot and cold water are available mixing taps should be provided. There should be suitable hygienic means of drying hands. Where paper towels are used, a sufficient number of dispensers and receptacles should be provided adjacent to each washing facility. Taps of a non-hand operable type are desirable. The facilities should be furnished with properly trapped waste pipes leading to drains. 4.4.5 Disinfection facilities. Where appropriate adequate facilities for cleaning and disinfection of working implements and equipment should be provided. These facilities should be constructed of corrosion resistant materials, capable of being easily cleaned, and should be fitted with suitable means of supplying warm and cold water in sufficient quantities. 4.4.6 Lighting. Adequate natural or artificial lighting should be provided throughout the establishment. Where appropriate, the lighting should not alter colours and the intensity should not be less than: 540 lux (50 foot candles) at all inspection points 220 lux (20 foot candles) in work rooms 110 lux (10 foot candles) in other areas. -- 5 of 14 -- CXC 30-1983 Page 6 of 14 Light bulbs and fixtures suspended over food materials in any stage of production should be of a safety type and protected to prevent contamination of food in case of breakage. 4.4.7 Ventilation. Adequate ventilation should be provided to prevent excessive heat, steam condensation and dust and to remove contaminated air. The direction of the air flow should never be from a dirty area to a clean area. Ventilation openings should be provided with a screen or other protecting enclosure of non-corrodible material. Screens should be easily removab