1 CXC 71-R-2013 REGIONAL CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STREET-VENDED FOODS (NEAR EAST) CXC 71-R-2013 INTRODUCTION Street-vended ready-to-eat foods constitute an important link of the food supply chain as they have spread at a rather fast rate in many countries due to socioeconomic changes. In fact, people opt for such foods for their special taste and affordability. These foods are also necessary to certain societies, namely in developing countries as they offer ready-to-eat meals that even the poorest can afford. Despite this important aspect, these foods represent on the other hand a possible health threat. Due to the potential chemical and bacterial contamination out on the streets, the present guidelines recommend raising the awareness of the people working in the ready-to-eat foods sector and improving the environmental conditions in which those foods are vended. They also recommend providing the necessary services to help the vendors guarantee the safety of such foods. In addition to tackling the role of authorities and entities regulating street food vending, the present examines the standar ds of this important sector of the food system, and sheds the light on the principles of hygiene that should be respected in every step of the process. SECTION 1 – OBJECTIVES The present directives tackle the conditions that should be taken into consideration when setting street food standards. They include legal provisions, accurate implementation and practice. They also aim at helping the relevant authorities in improving the level of theses foods’ preparation and vending processes i n way that guarantees safe, healthy and nutritional foods to the consumers, in accessible locations. SECTION 2 – SCOPE, USAGE AND DEFINITIONS 2.1 Scope The present guidelines define the general hygienic requirements and recommended practices concerning the preparation and vending of street foods. 2.2 Usage Each Section of the present document indicates the goals to be achieved and the justifications of such goals, as far as food hygiene is concerned. 2.3 Definitions For the purposes of the present guidelines, the terms used herein shall have the following definitions: 2.3.1 Appliances The whole or any part of any utensil, machinery, instrument, apparatus or article used or intended for use, in or for making, preparing, keeping, selling or supplying of food. 2.3.2 Clean water Water that does not compromise food safety in the circumstance of its use. 2.3.3 Crockery All tools used for food serving and consumption (whether non-disposable or disposable), and they include cups (glasses), plates, trays, mugs, spoons, forks and ladles. 2.3.4 Disposable articles Any appliance, container, implement, utensil or wrapper that is intended for use only once in the preparation, storage, display, serving or sale of food. 2.3.5 Impermeable Preventing the passage/absorption of water and/or fluids. 2.3.6 Microorganisms Any microscopic living organism that can cause disease or food spoilage. 2.3.7 Street food vendor Individual selling street foods in street food stalls or centres. -- 1 of 8 -- 2 CXC 71-R-2013 2.3.8 Perishable food Any food that needs to be kept refrigerated or frozen to minimize or prevent growth of food poisoning organisms (and/or food spoilage) (e.g. food that consists wholly or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish or shellfish). 2.3.9 Potable/Drinking water Treated water, which shall comply with WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. 2.3.10 Ready-to-eat foods Any food (including beverages) which is normally consumed in its raw state or any food handled, processed, mixed, cooked, or otherwise prepared into a form in which it is normally consumed without further processing. 2.3.11 Relevant authority Any ministry having competent responsibility or any local officially recognized authority. 2.3.12 Sealed containers Food grade containers such as: (a) hermetically sealed containers; (b) sealed jars, with anchor and crown type closures; (c) milk bottles sealed with aluminium caps; (d) glass jars and bottles with screw caps; and (e) cans and similar containers with seals. 2.3.13 Street Food Centre Any public place or establishment designated by the relevant authority for the preparation, display and sale of street foods by multiple vendors. 2.3.14 Street Foods Wide range of ready-to-eat foods sold and sometimes prepared in public places, notably streets. 2.3.15 Street Food Stall A place where street food is prepared, displayed, served or sold to the public. It includes carts, tables, benches, baskets, chairs, vehicles with or without wheels and any other structure approved by the relevant authority where on it or in it, any street foods are displayed for sale. 2.3.16 Waste Water Waste water means sullage water arising as a result of the activity of vendors. 2.3.17 Water containers Any form of food grade container which is used solely for the purpose of storing and serving water and has not been used previously for any other purposes which could cause contamination of the water stored in it. SECTION 3 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 3.1 Rules and regulations 3.1.1 Appropriate rules and regulations should be drafted in order to be easily endorsed with the possibility of controlling the street foods industry as an integral part of the food preparation process. Such legislations can be either elaborated separately or for incorporation into existing food regulations. 3.1.2 The general hygienic requirements and practices to be followed by the vendors should be translated by the relevant authorities into Codes of practice which are recognized as cost effective tools for the control of street foods, by fully taking into account local conditions including specific risk factors that are relevant to each operation. 3.2 Licensing/ Registration of vendors No vendor shall conduct his/her business of preparation, packing, storage, display and sale of any street foods unless he/she is licensed/ registered under the relevant food regulations. 3.3 Conditions for licensing 3.3.1 No relevant authority shall issue or renew the license of any vendor who does not commit himself to comply with all the requirements of the Code of Practice established by the officially recognized authorities within a determined period of time. 3.3.2 It is essential that basic training in food hygiene is carried out by the relevant authorities prior to issuing or renewing the license/ registration of street food vendors. 3.4 Display of notices 3.4.1 Every licensed vendor shall at all times display visibly his/her vendor's License/ Registration and any other notices that are required by the relevant authorities to be displayed. -- 2 of 8 -- 3 CXC 71-R-2013 3.5 Pest and animal control 3.5.1 Every vendor shall at all times take appropriate measures to keep his/her stall free from animals (e.g. cats and dogs) and pests (e.g. rodents or insects) to prevent contamination of the food. 3.5.2 Every vendor shall, on becoming aware of the presence of any such pest or harbourage, immediately take all practicable measures to get rid of the pest or harbourage and to prevent re-infestation. 3.5.3 Any food found to have become contaminated by pests shall be appropriately disposed of in a hygienic manner. 3.5.4 The direct or indirect contamination of food with pest control materials such as poisons must be prevented. SECTION 4 – VENDORS 4.1 Health condition of the vendors 4.1.1 No vendor, assistant or food handler shall be allowed to perform his/her job if showing any of the following symptoms: jaundice, diarrhoea, vomiting, fever, sore throat with fever, discharge from ear, eye and nose, visibly infected skin lesions (boils, cuts, etc.) In such cases, he/she shall cease from handling food in any capacity and seek medical treatment. 4.1.2 Any vendor, helper or food handler who has been identified as or is known to be or has previously been a carrier of food borne disease organisms, shall not be involved in any food handling activity until certified by a Medical Officer of Health or any other medical practitioner as a non-carrier. 4.1.3 Any vendor, helper or food handler shall be required to be immunized as required by the relevant authority. 4.2 Personal hygiene and behaviour Every vendor, helper or food handler, during the conduct of his business, shall observe the following: 4.2.1 Wear an identification tag if issued and required by the relevant authority. 4.2.2 Wear clean and proper clothing. 4.2.3 Wash hands thoroughly with soap and running clean water before and after handling food, after visiting the toilet, after handling unsanitary articles, touching animals, touching raw food, after handling toxic and dangerous materials as and when necessary. If running clean water is not available, an acceptable alternative hand washing method should be agreed to by the relevant authority. 4.2.4 Finger nails should be kept short and clean at all times, and avoid wearing jewellery or ornaments during food preparation. 4.2.5 Hair should be kept clean and tidy and should be covered during operation. 4.2.6 Non-infected cuts shall be completely protected by a waterproof dressing which is firmly secured and routinely changed. 4.2.7 Shall not smoke or chew chewing-gum while preparing or serving food. 4.2.8 Refrain from any unhygienic practices such as spitting and cleaning nose, ears or any other body orifice or touching any body part while handling food. 4.2.9 Shall not sneeze or cough over or onto the food. 4.2.10 No vendor is allowed to use the stall as a sleeping or dwelling place, or for any other personal activity. 4.3 Training of vendors 4.3.1 The vendor shall ensure that he/she and all food handlers and helpers have completed basic food hygiene training by the competent authority or other institution recognised or approved by the competent authority. 4.4 Vendors associations The formation of street food vendor associations or cooperatives should be encouraged to provide a liaison point with the relevant authorities in view of facilitating the implementation of control measures. SECTION 5 – DESIGN AND STRUCTURE 5.1 Location 5.1.1 The location of street food stall(s) should be suitable for the purpose of avoiding contamination of the food prepared and served or sold at or from the stall. Stalls shall be located in areas designated by the relevant authorities. 5.1.2 The area where the stall is located and immediate surroundings should be easily cleaned and capable of withstanding repeated washing and scrubbing. 5.1.3 The space in and around the street food stall shall be free of unnecessary stored goods or articles and discarded articles in order to permit easy access for cleaning. 5.1.4 The stall should have a convenient access to an inlet of a drainage system or any suitable means of disposing waste water in a sanitary manner. 5.2 Structures 5.2.1 Street food stall shall be of a type approved by the competent authority and shall be made of impervious materials that can be cleaned and disinfected and maintained in a good state of repair. -- 3 of 8 -- 4 CXC 71-R-2013 5.2.2 Food preparation areas and food contact surfaces should be made of a smooth and impermeable food grade material. 5.2.3 All cooking ranges, washing equipment, working tables, shelves and cupboards on or in which food is placed should be at least 45 cm above the ground. 5.2.4 There should be adequate provision of artificial light of sufficient intensity to ensure a reasonable standard of illumination for every part of the stall. 5.3 Sanitation 5.3.1 Water supply Vendors should ensure sufficient supply of potable water at all times. Where necessary, such as in the case of mobile vendors or where potable water supply is not yet available, potable water should be stored in clean water containers. 5.3.2 Waste water disposal Vendors' stalls should have an efficient waste water disposal system which should be maintained in a good state of repair and working order. The system should be large enough to carry peak loads and be provided with traps to ensure only liquid waste is discharged into the drain/sewer. 5.3.3 Solid waste disposal Solid waste material should be handled in such a manner as to avoid contamination of food and/or potable water. Waste should be removed from the working area of the stall as often as necessary and at least daily. All solid waste should be properly disposed into suitable containers which are secured with tight fitting lids or placed in rubbish bins or central rubbish bins. Waste receptacles, equipment which has come into contact with the waste and waste storage areas should be cleaned and disinfected when required by the relevant authority. Only appropriate and suitable sanitizing agents should be used. In areas without garbage collection service, solid waste is to be disposed of in a sanitary manner, as recommended or approved by the competent authority. 5.3.4 Cleaning All food contact surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected and floors and surrounding areas should be thoroughly cleaned at least daily. Immediately after disposal of the waste, receptacles used for storage and any equipment which has come into contact with the waste should be cleaned using one of the methods described in paragraph (6.5). The waste storage area should also be cleaned daily. 5.3.5 Toilets Every vendor, helper or food handler should have easy access to sanitary facilities which are kept at all times in a clean and operational condition. SECTION 6 – APPLIANCES 6.1 The appliances should be kept clean. The equipment, including containers for storing drinking water, should be made of materials which do not transmit toxic substances, odour or taste, are not absorbent (unless its use is intended for that purpose and will not result in food contamination), are resistant to corrosion and capable of withstanding repeated cleaning and disinfection. 6.2 Every cutting surface used in the preparation of food should be free from cracks and crevices, with only reasonable wear and tear, and should be cleaned using one of the methods described in Section 6.5 at least on the following occasions: (f) before and after daily operations; and (g) immediately after being used to prepare raw food. 6.3 Cooked and uncooked food should be handled with separate utensils. 6.4 Every vendor should ensure that all defective, damaged, cracked, rusted, chipped and unsuitable appliances and crockery are removed from use and discarded. 6.5 All non-disposable utensils should be regularly cleaned by thoroughly washing them in warm water containing adequate amount of soap or other suitable detergents and then either immersing them for one-half (30 seconds) minute in boiling clean water and draining them or, for two (2) minutes in potable water at a temperature of not less than 77°C and draining them. In the case where non-disposable crockery is used and water at 77°C or boiling temperatures is unavailable, potable water, wash soap or detergent and running water rinse is allo