155 Adopted 2009. Revised 2009. CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE REDUCTION OF CONTAMINATION OF FOOD WITH POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS (PAH) FROM SMOKING AND DIRECT DRYING PROCESSES CXC 68-2009 INTRODUCTION 1. Many chemical contaminants are formed during the combustion of fuel both in the smoking and in the direct drying process. Examples include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), dioxins, formaldehyde, nitrogen and sulphur oxides (relevant for formation of e.g. nitrosamines). Furthermore, heavy metals are also found in combustion gases. The types and amount of contaminants depend on the fuel used, the temperature and possible other parameters. 2. Hundreds of individual PAH may be formed and released as a result of incomplete combustion or pyrolysis of organic matter, during forest fires and volcanic eruptions as well as industrial processes or other human activities, including the processing and preparation of food. Owing to their mode of formation, PAH are ubiquitous in the environment and therefore enter the food chain, especially via air and soil. PAH can be present in the raw materials due to environmental contamination from the air by deposition on crops, from contaminated soils and transfer from water to fresh and marine invertebrates. Commercial and domestic food preparation such as smoking, drying, roasting, baking, barbecuing or frying are recognized as important sources of food contamination. Presence of PAH in vegetable oils can also originate from smoking and drying processes used to dry oil seeds prior to oil extraction. 3. Contamination of food with PAH via environmental contamination should be controlled either by source-directed measures like filtering the smoke from relevant industries (e.g. cement work, incinerator and metallurgy) and limiting the exhaust fumes of PAH from cars. Good practices, including the selection of appropriate farmland/fishing waters, could also decrease the environmental contamination of raw materials with PAH. However, this contribution to the reduction of PAH intake from the final food is not included in this Code of Practice. 4. Processes such as smoking and direct drying provide a wide variety of food textures and flavours and consequently a broader choice for consumers. Many types of smoked and dried foods are traditional food items, where these types of processes have been used to prolong the storage period, keep quality and provide flavour and consistency required by -- 1 of 16 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 156 consumers. The extension of shelf life may also have an effect on the nutritional value of foodstuffs, such as preservation of the vitamin content. 5. The major contributors to intakes of PAH are cereals and cereal products (owing to high consumption in the diets) and vegetable fats and oils (owing to higher concentrations of PAH in this food group). Generally, despite their usually higher concentration of PAH, smoked fish and meats and barbecued foods do not contribute significantly, particularly as they are small components of the diet. However, they do make larger contributions leading to higher PAH intakes where these foods make up a large part of the diet. 6. In its opinion on PAH, JECFA recommended that efforts should be made to reduce contamination with PAH during drying and smoking processes, e.g. by replacing direct smoking (with smoke developed in the smoking chamber, traditionally in smokehouses) with indirect smoking. OBJECTIVES 7. This Code of Practice intends to provide guidance for national authorities and manufactures to prevent and reduce contamination of food with PAH in commercial smoking and direct drying processes. For this purpose, this Code of Practice identifies important points to consider and provides relevant recommendations. The smoking and direct drying processes are used both in industry and in private households. Food is often smoked by consumers using a direct smoking process, while drying can be done either directly or indirectly, e.g. in the sun or in a microwave oven. The Code of Practice and the guidance could also be used as the basis for information to consumers. 8. The Code of Practice recognizes the benefits of smoking and drying including the availability of traditional smoked food products, prevention of spoilage and microbiological contamination and growth, and the potential for lowering the risks to human health from PAH formed in foods during processing. -- 2 of 16 -- 157 CONTAMINATION OF FOOD WITH POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS (PAH) FROM SMOKING AND DIRECT DRYING PROCESSES (CXC 68-2009) SCOPE 9. The scope of this Code of Practice is PAH contamination during commercial smoking, both direct and indirect, and direct drying processes. 10. The Code of Practice does not cover PAH contamination in food originating from a) Use of herbs and spices in the smoking process1; b) Indirect drying; c) Other food processes, including barbecuing and other types of cooking in private homes or the catering sector; and d) Environmental contamination of raw materials. 11. This Code of Practice covers contamination with PAH only. It should, however, be emphasized that conditions that lead to a reduction of one contaminant might lead to increases in the levels of other contaminants or could lower the microbiological safety of the food products. The possible interplay among levels of contaminants like PAH, heterocyclic amines, and nitrosamines is not always well understood, but these contaminants can be food safety problems, either as such or due to the reaction with food components. This is the case of nitrogen oxide reaction with components in the food leading to the formation of nitrosamines. It should be underlined that any guidance given to reduce PAH levels in a final product should not lead to an increased risk to human health due to increases in other contaminants or to reduced microbiological safety. DEFINITIONS 12. Contaminant is defined as any substance not intentionally added to food, which is present in such food as a result of the production (including operations carried out in crop husbandry, animal husbandry and veterinary medicine), manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food or as a result of environmental contamination. The term does not include insect fragments, rodent hairs and other extraneous matter. 13. Drying direct refers to two types of drying processes: One is a drying process where the combustion gas is used directly as the drying gas in contact with the foods and the other is sun drying. 1 In the smoking process, the fuel used is often various wood species, in some cases with herbs and spices, e.g. juniper berries, to give a characteristic flavour. Such herbs and spices may be a potential source for PAH contamination. However, many different types of herbs and spices can be used, but normally only in smaller quantities and knowledge about the influence of using herbs and spices is limited. Their use is therefore not considered in this Code of Practice. -- 3 of 16 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 158 14. Sun drying is a direct drying process where sunshine and wind are used for drying under circumstances open to the environment. 15. Drying, indirect is a drying process where the combustion gasses do not come into direct contact with the foods, where the hot air is heated via a heat exchanger, electricity or by other means. 16. HACCP: A system which identifies, evaluates, and controls hazards which are significant for food safety. 17. Plant materials, other is covering other types of fuels than woods used in the smoking or drying process, e.g. bagasse, corn cobs and coconut husk and shell. 18. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) are a group of contaminants that constitute a large class of organic compounds containing two or more fused aromatic rings made up of carbon and hydrogen atoms. 19. Pyrolysis is the chemical decomposition of organic materials by heating in the absence of oxygen or any other reagents, except possibly steam. 20. Smoke consists of liquid and solid particulates suspended in a gaseous phase. Particles in the smoke, generally of a size of 0.2–0.4 μm (or as low as 0.05 to 1 μm), are estimated to constitute 90% of its overall weight. The chemical composition of smoke is complex and more than 300 components have been identified. 21. Smoke condensates are products obtained by controlled thermal degradation of wood in a limited supply of oxygen (pyrolysis), subsequent condensation of the resulting smoke vapours, and fractionation of the resulting liquid products. 22. Smoking of food is a process used as a preservation method to prolong the shelf life of food due to components of the smoke inhibiting growth of some microorganisms. The smoking process is furthermore used to achieve the characteristic taste and appearance of smoked food. 23. Smoking, direct is a smoking process, where the smoke is developed in the chamber in which the food is processed. 24. Smoking indirect is a process where smoke generators are used, and the smoke is being developed in a chamber, separate from where the food is smoked. The smoke may be cleaned in various ways, e.g. by use of a water filter or a tar condenser before being fed into the smoke chamber. -- 4 of 16 -- 159 CONTAMINATION OF FOOD WITH POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS (PAH) FROM SMOKING AND DIRECT DRYING PROCESSES (CXC 68-2009) GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR REDUCING PAH CONTAMINATION IN FOOD 25. The food producer should be aware of the conditions under which higher levels of PAH are generated and wherever possible, should control those conditions to minimize their formation. To accomplish this, an analysis of important points to consider in processes used or intended to be used in food production with smoking or direct drying should be carried out. 26. The first step of the analysis is to identify important points to consider. Possible major important points to consider are described later in the code. 27. The producer should evaluate the identified important points to consider such as: a) Possible sources of PAH from the environment and the process; b) Possible effects on consumer health; c) Controllability; and b) Possible measures to reduce PAH contamination. 28. The producer should take appropriate measures to control the identified important points for reducing PAH, based on the results of the analysis and other legitimate factors relevant for human health protection and economic activities such as a) The microbiological status and possible risks from other contaminants; b) The organoleptic properties and quality of the final product (the ideal method would have no adverse effects on the appearance, flavour, taste or nutritional properties of the product); and c) Feasibility and effectiveness of controls (cost, commercial availability, occupational hazards). 29. The producer should monitor the effects of the implemented measures and should review them if necessary. -- 5 of 16 -- PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FOOD AND FEED CONTAMINATION (1st Edition) 160 EVALUATION OF COMPLIANCE WITH RELEVANT LEGISLATION 30. Processed food shall be in compliance with relevant national or international legislation and standards, including general requirements for consumer protection. Furthermore, food shall be produced in accordance with relevant Codex or national codes of practice. Some of these may contain further information about drying or smoking, which should also be considered. GENERAL REMARKS ON SMOKING AND DIRECT DRYING PROCESSES 31. The formation of PAH during smoking and direct drying is dependent on a number of variables, including: a) Fuel (woods and other plant materials, diesel, gases, liquid/solid waste and other fuels); b) Smoking or drying method (direct or indirect); c) Smoke generation process in relation to the temperature of pyrolysis and to airflow in the case of a smoke generator (friction, smouldering, thermostated plates) or in relation with other methods such as direct smoking or regenerated smoke by atomizing smoke condensate (liquid smoke); d) The distance between the food and the heat source; e) Position of the food in relation to the heat source; f) Fat content of the food and what happens to it during processing; g) Duration of smoking and direct drying; h) Temperature during smoking and direct drying; i) Cleanliness and maintenance of equipment; j) Design of the smoking chamber and the equipment used for smoke/air mixture (which influences the smoke density in the smoking chamber). 32. In general, changes in processing techniques can in some cases reduce the amount of PAH formed during processing. Indirect drying or smoking processes result in lower PAH contents than direct drying or smoking. Also the use of smoke condensates, selection of fuel such as wood species and adjusting times and processing temperatures influences the PAH formation. Addition of activated carbon to coconut oil at the right dosage during the refining process can completely remove PAH contamination. 33. Application of an HACCP system in accordance with the principles and steps as recommended by Codex is one of options for reducing PAH. -- 6 of 16 -- 161 CONTAMINATION OF FOOD WITH POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS (PAH) FROM SMOKING AND DIRECT DRYING PROCESSES (CXC 68-2009) SMOKING 34. Smoking techniques have been used for centuries as a method for preserving meat and fish. Smoking impregnates the high-protein food with aromatic components, which lend flavour and colour to the food, and also play a bacteriostatic and antioxidant role. Fuel used in smoking 35. For smoking of food, woods are normally used, but other types of fuels like bagasse (plant material from sugarcane), corn cob and coconut husk and shell are used. The fuel used is an important point to consider for the potential contaminants of the food, e.g. the PAH contamination of food differs if wood or straw is used. PAH contamination of oil seed is higher when using coconut husk compared to coconut shell as fuel due to the higher lignin content of the husk. 36. The wood species used have an influence on PAH formation. However, it has not been possible to find generally accepted recommendations on the use of wood species or other plant materials. Therefore, it is recommended, that the individual species of woods and other plant materials used in smoking processes should be evaluated in relation to PAH formation before use. Also, the wood to be used in the process of smoking should preferably not be resinous. 37. The use of other fuels than wood and other plant materials for the purpose of smoking foodstuffs should be discouraged. Fuels like diesel oil, rubber (e.g. tyres) or waste oil must not be used even as a partial component, as they may lead to significantly increased PAH levels. Woods treated with chemicals such as for preserving, waterproofing, fireproofing etc.