Adopted in 2004. Amendment 2009. CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS CXC 57-2004 INTRODUCTION 1 1. OBJECTIVES 1 2. SCOPE AND USE OF THE DOCUMENT 1 2.1 Scope 1 2.2 Use of the document 1 2.3 Overarching principles applying to the production, processing and handling of all milk and milk products 2 2.4 Relative roles of milk producers, manufacturers, distributors, retailers, transporters, consumers, and competent authorities 2 2.5 Definitions 3 2.6 Suitability 3 3. PRIMARY PRODUCTION 4 3.1 Environmental hygiene 5 3.2 Hygienic production of milk 5 3.3 Handling, storage and transport of milk 6 3.4 Documentation and record keeping 6 4. ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES 6 4.1 Equipment 7 5. CONTROL OF OPERATION 7 5.1 Control of food hazards 7 5.2 Key aspects of hygiene control systems 8 5.3 Incoming material (other than milk) requirements 10 5.4 Water 10 6. ESTABLISHMENT: MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION 10 6.1 Maintenance and cleaning 10 6.2 Cleaning programmes 10 7. ESTABLISHMENT: PERSONAL HYGIENE 11 8. TRANSPORTATION 11 8.1 Requirements 11 8.2 Use and maintenance 11 9. PRODUCT INFORMATION AND CONSUMER AWARENESS 11 9.1 Labelling 11 10. TRAINING 11 10.1 Training programmes 11 ANNEX I – GUIDELINES FOR THE PRIMARY PRODUCTION OF MILK 12 INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES 12 SCOPE 12 USE OF ANNEX I 12 3. PRIMARY PRODUCTION 13 3.1 Environmental hygiene 13 3.2 Hygienic production of milk 13 3.3 Handling, storage and transport of milk 17 3.4 Documentation and recordkeeping 19 ANNEX II – GUIDELINES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF CONTROL MEASURES DURING AND AFTER PROCESSING 21 INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES 21 SCOPE 21 USE OF ANNEX II 21 DEFINITIONS 21 5. CONTROL OF OPERATIONS 22 5.1 Control of food hazards 22 5.2 Key aspects of hygiene control systems 25 APPENDIX A – MICROBIOSTATIC CONTROL MEASURES 27 APPENDIX B – MICROBIOCIDAL CONTROL MEASURES 28 -- 1 of 33 -- 1 CXC 57-2004 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS CXC 57-2004 INTRODUCTION Milk and milk products are a rich and convenient source of nutrients for people in many countries and international trade of milk-based commodities is significant. The purpose of this Code is to provide guidance to ensure the safety and suitability of milk and milk products to protect consumers’ health and to facilitate trade. The Code satisfies the food hygiene provisions in the Codex Alimentarius Procedural Manual under “Relations Between Commodity Committees and General Committees” for use in the various dairy standards. All foods have the potential to cause food borne illness, and milk and milk products are no exception. Dairy animals may carry human pathogens. Such pathogens present in milk may increase the risk of causing food borne illness. Moreover, the milking procedure, subsequent pooling and the storage of milk carry the risks of further contamination from man or the environment or growth of inherent pathogens. Further, the composition of many milk products makes them good media for the outgrowth of pathogenic micro-organisms. Potential also exists for the contamination of milk with residues of veterinary drugs, pesticides and other chemical contaminants. Therefore, implementing the proper hygienic control of milk and milk products throughout the food chain is essential to ensure the safety and suitability of these foods for their intended use. It is the purpose of this Code to provide guidance to countries so that their appropriate level of public health protection for milk and milk products may be achieved. It is also the purpose of this code to prevent unhygienic practices and conditions in the production, processing, and handling of milk and milk products, as in many countries milk and milk products form a large portion of the diet of consumers especially infants, children, and pregnant and lactating women. This document is formatted in accordance with the General Principles of Food Hygiene, (CXC 1-1969). This Code presents principles for the hygienic production and manufacture of milk and milk products and guidance on their application. This Code takes into consideration, to the extent possible, the various production and processing procedures as well as the differing characteristics of milk from various milking animals used by member countries. It focuses on acceptable food safety outcomes achieved through the use of one or more validated food safety control measures, rather than mandating specific processes for individual products. 1. OBJECTIVES The objective of this Code is to apply the recommendations of the Recommended Code of Practice: General Principles of Food Hygiene to the particular case of milk and milk products. It also provides guidance on how to achieve the general requirements contained in the hygiene sections of the Codex commodity standards for milk products. 2. SCOPE AND USE OF THE DOCUMENT 2.1 Scope This Code applies to the production, processing and handling of milk and milk products as defined in the General Standard for the Use of Dairy Terms1 (CODEX STAN 206-1999). Where milk products are referred to in the code it is understood that this term also includes composite milk products. The scope of this Code does not extend to the production of raw drinking milk. This Code applies to products in international trade. It may also serve as a basis for national legislation. 2.2 Use of the document The provisions of this document are supplemental to and must be used in conjunction with, the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969). This document consists of a series of principles, explanatory narratives and guidelines. Over-arching principles that are applicable to all phases of production, processing and handling of milk and milk products are given in Section 2.3. 1 This code applies to the milk and milk products obtained from all milking animals. -- 2 of 33 -- 2 CXC 57-2004 Specific principles and their associated explanatory narratives and guidelines are given in the appropriate section. Principles, shown in bold text, are a statement of the goal or objective that is to be achieved. Explanatory narratives, shown in italicized text, serve to explain the purpose of the stated principle. Guidelines for the application of the stated principle are shown in normal text. The annexes are an integral part of this Code. They provide guidelines for different approaches to the application of the principles. The purpose of the guidelines contained in the annexes is to explain and illustrate how principles in the main body of this code may be met in practice. Thus, the Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969), the main body of this Code and its annexes must be used together to obtain complete guidance on the hygienic production of milk and milk products. 2.3 Overarching principles applying to the production, processing and handling of all milk and milk products The following overarching principles apply to the production, processing and handling of all milk and milk products. • From raw material production to the point of consumption, dairy products produced under this Code should be subject to a combination of control measures, and these control measures should be shown to achieve the appropriate level of public health protection. • Good hygienic practices should be applied throughout the food chain so that milk and milk products are safe and suitable for their intended use. No part of this Code should be used without consideration of what takes place in the chain of events prior to the particular measure being applied or what will take place subsequent to a particular step. The Code should only be used within the context of an understanding that there is a continuum of controls that are applied from production to consumption. • Wherever appropriate, hygienic practices for milk and milk products should be implemented within the context of HACCP as described in the Annex to the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969). This principle is presented with the recognition that there are limitations to the full application of HACCP principles at the primary production level. In the case where HACCP cannot be implemented at the farm level, good hygienic practices, good agricultural practices and good veterinary practices should be followed. • Control measures should be validated as effective. The overall effectiveness of the system of control measures should be subject to validation. Control measures or combinations thereof should be validated according to the prevalence of hazards in the milk used, taking into consideration the characteristics of the individual hazards(s) of concern and established Food Safety Objectives and/or related objectives and criteria. Guidance on validating control measures should be obtained from the Guidelines for the Validation of Food Hygiene Control Measures (CXG 69-2008). 2.4 Relative roles of milk producers, manufacturers, distributors, retailers, transporters, consumers, and competent authorities Although the responsibility lies with the manufacturer for ensuring that the foods manufactured are safe and suitable, there is a continuum of effective effort or controls needed by other parties, including milk producers, to assure the safety and suitability of milk products. It is important to recognize that distributors, competent authorities and consumers also have a role in ensuring the safety and suitability of milk and milk products. The interrelationship and impact of one segment of the food chain on another segment is important to ensure that potential gaps in the continuum are dealt with through communication and interaction between the milk producer, the manufacturer, the distributor and the retailer. While it is principally the responsibility of the manufacturer to conduct the hazard analysis within the context of developing a control system based on HACCP and thus to identify and control hazards associated with the incoming raw materials, the milk producer should also have an understanding of the hazards associated with milk, so as to assist in minimizing their presence in the raw material. To achieve an effective continuum, the various parties should pay attention, in particular, to the following responsibilities. -- 3 of 33 -- 3 CXC 57-2004 • Producers should ensure that good agricultural, hygienic and animal husbandry practices are employed at the farm level. These practices should be adapted, as appropriate, to any specific safety-related needs specified and communicated by the manufacturer. • Manufacturers should utilize good manufacturing and good hygienic practices, especially those presented in this Code. Any needs for additional measures with regard to controlling hazards during primary production should be effectively communicated to suppliers to enable the milk producer to adapt their operations to meet them. Likewise, the manufacturer may have to implement controls or adapt their manufacturing processes based on the ability of the milk producer to minimize or prevent hazards associated with the milk. Such additional needs should be supported by an adequate hazard analysis and should, where appropriate, take into consideration technological limitations during processing, and/or market demands. • Distributors, transporters and retailers should assure that milk and milk products under their control are handled and stored properly and according to the manufacturer’s instructions. • Consumers should accept the responsibility of ensuring that milk and milk products in their possession are handled and stored properly and according to the manufacturer’s instructions. • In order to effectively implement this Code, competent authorities should have in place legislative framework (e.g., acts, regulations, guidelines and requirements), an adequate infrastructure and properly trained inspectors and personnel. For food import and export control systems, reference should be made to the Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CXG 26-1997). Control programmes should focus on auditing relevant documentation that shows that each participant along the chain has met their individual responsibilities to ensure that the end products meet established food safety objectives and/or related objectives and criteria. It is important that clear communications and interactions exist between all parties to help assure good practices are employed, that problems are identified and resolved in an expeditious manner, and that the integrity of the entire food chain is maintained. 2.5 Definitions Definitions contained in the General Standard for the Use of Dairy Terms (CODEX STAN 206-1999) are incorporated into this document by reference. Definitions relevant to a particular annex (e.g., heat treatment definitions) will be contained in the relevant annex. Avoid – To keep away from, to the extent reasonably practicable. This term will be used when it is possible, in theory, to have no contamination or to constrain a particular practice. Control measure – Any action and activity that can be used to prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an acceptable level.2 Food safety objective3 Minimize – To reduce the likelihood of occurrence or the consequence of an unavoidable situation such as microbiological growth. Process criteria4 – The process control parameters (e.g. time, temperature) applied at a processing step. Raw milk – Milk (as defined in General Standard for the Use of Dairy Terms (CODEX STAN 206-1999)) which has not been heated beyond 40ºC or undergone any treatment that has an equivalent effect. Shelf life – The period during which the product maintains its microbiological safety and suitability at a specified storage temperature and, where appropriate, specified storage and handling conditions. Validation5 2.6 Suitability Food Suitability as defined in the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969) is: “Assurance that food is acceptable for human consumption according to its intended use”. For the purposes of this Code, Suitability includes: • The concept of wholesomeness and soundness. 2 For purposes of this Code, a control measure encompasses any action or activity used to eliminate a hazard or reduce it to an acceptable level. In addition the term refers to any action or activity taken to reduce the likelihood of the occurrence of a hazard in milk or milk products. Thus, control measures include both process controls such as heating, cooling, acidification, etc., as well as other activities such as general hygiene and pest control programmes, etc. 3 Procedural Manual, Codex Alimentarius Commission. 4 This term is defined in Guidelines for the Validation of Food Hygiene Control Measures (CXG 69-2008). 5 This term is defined in Guidelines for the Validation of Food Hygiene Control Measures (CXG 69-2008). -- 4 of 33 -- 4 CXC 57-2004 • Only matters relating to hygiene. Matters relating to grade, commercial quality or compliance