CXC 39 Page 1 of 18 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR PRECOOKED AND COOKED FOODS IN MASS CATERING CXC 39-1993 1 CONTENTS PAGE EXPLANATORY PREFACE .......................................................................................................................................... 2 Section I - SCOPE...................................................................................................................................2 Section II - DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................................3 Section III - HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS IN PRODUCTION/HARVESTING AREA.......................................4 Section IV - (A) PRODUCTION OR PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES ...................................................................................................................4 (B) SERVING ROOMS: DESIGN AND FACILITIES .................................................................9 Section V - ESTABLISHMENT: HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS .....................................................................9 Section VI - PERSONNEL HYGIENE AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS ..................................................... 12 Section VII - ESTABLISHMENT: HYGIENIC PROCESSING REQUIREMENTS ........................................... 13 1 The Code of Hygienic Practice for Precooked and Cooked Foods in Mass Catering was adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission at its 20th Session in 1993. The Code has been sent to all Member Nations and Associated Members of FAO and WHO as an advisory text, and it is for individual governments to decide what use they wish to make of it. The Commission has expressed the view that codes of practice might provide useful checklists of requirements for national food control or enforcement authorities. -- 1 of 18 -- CXC 39 Page 2 of 18 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR PRECOOKED AND COOKED FOODS IN MASS CATERING CXC 39-1993 EXPLANATORY PREFACE A. This Code has, as far as possible, been made consistent with the format and content of the General Principles of Food Hygiene. B. The need for this Code is based on the following considerations: 1. Epidemiological data show that many outbreaks of food poisoning are caused by food produced in mass catering. 2. Large-scale catering operations are particularly hazardous because of the way the food is stored and handled. 3. Outbreaks can involve large numbers of people. 4. Persons fed by mass catering are often especially vulnerable - for instance children, the elderly and hospital patients, especially those who are immuno-compromised. C. The Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system has been applied to the Code. The HACCP System consists of: 1. An assessment of hazards associated with growing, harvesting, processing/manufacturing, marketing, preparation and/or use of a given raw material or food product. 2. Determination of critical control points required to control any identified hazard(s). 3. Establishment of procedures to monitor critical control points. The critical control points have been identified in the Code and explanatory notes describing the risk and giving the type and frequency of controls to be applied, have been inserted in connection with the relevant paragraphs. (CCP - Notes) WHO/ICMSF 1982. Report of the WHO/ICMSF Meeting on Hazard Analysis, Critical Control Point System in Food Hygiene. World Health Organization VPH 82/37, Geneva, and also the ICMSF handbook on the principles and application of HACCP). D. Properly trained inspectors and personnel and an adequate sanitary infrastructure are necessary in order to implement the Code satisfactorily. SECTION I - SCOPE 1. This Code deals with the hygienic requirements for cooking raw foods and handling cooked and precooked foods intended for feeding large groups of people, such as children in schools, the elderly either in old peoples homes or by means of "meals on wheels", patients in nursing homes and hospitals, persons in prisons, schools and similar institutions. These categories of people are supplied as groups with the same types of foods. In this social type of mass catering the consumer has limited choice in the food, he or she eats. This -- 2 of 18 -- CXC 39 Page 3 of 18 Code is not intended for industrial production of complete meals, but may give guidance on specific points to those who are involved. For reasons of simplicity, foods served raw to the consumer, are not included. This does not necessarily mean that these foods will not constitute a hazard to health. 2. The foods covered in this code are defined at Section II paragraphs 2.6.a and 2.6.b. The information in the following paragraphs refers only to precooked foods as defined at paragraphs 2.6.b: Paragraphs 4.3.14.2, 4.3.14.3, 4.3.19.2, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 7.9.4 and 7.9.5. SECTION II - DEFINITIONS 2. For the purposes of this Code the following expressions have the meaning stated: 2.1 Catering - the preparation, storage and, where appropriate, delivery of food for consumption by the consumer at the place of preparation or at a satellite unit. 2.2 Catering Establishment - a kitchen where food is prepared or reheated for catering. 2.3 Chilled Food - product intended to be maintained at temperatures not exceeding 4C in any part of the product and stored for no longer than five days. 2.4 Cleaning - the removal of soil, food residues, dust, grease or other objectionable matter. 2.5 Contamination - the occurrence of any objectionable matter in the product. 2.6 a) Cooked Food - foods cooked and kept hot or reheated and kept hot for serving to the consumer. b) Precooked Foods - foods cooked, rapidly chilled and kept refrigerated or frozen. 2.7 Disinfection - the reduction, without adversely affecting the food by means of hygienically satisfactory chemical agents or physical methods, of the number of micro-organisms to a level that will not lead to harmful contamination of food. 2.8 Establishment - any building(s) or areas(s) in which food is handled after harvesting and the surroundings under the control of the same management. 2.9 Food Handling - any operation in the preparation, processing, cooking, packaging, storage, transport, distribution and service of food. 2.10 Food Handler - every person handling or coming into contact with food, or with any equipment or utensil used in food handling. 2.11 Food Hygiene - all measures necessary to ensure the safety, soundness and wholesomeness of food at all stages from its growth, production or manufacture until its final serving to individuals. 2.12 Frozen Food - product maintained at a temperature equal to or below -18C in any part of the product. 2.13 Lot - a definitive quantity of a cooked or pre-cooked food produced under essentially the same conditions at the same time. 2.14 Mass Catering - the preparation, storage and/or delivery and serving of food to a large number of people. -- 3 of 18 -- CXC 39 Page 4 of 18 2.15 Packaging Material - any containers such as cans, bottles, cartons, boxes, cases and sacks, or wrapping and covering material such as foil, film, metal, paper, wax-paper and cloth. 2.16 Pests - Insects, birds, rodents and any other animal capable of directly or indirectly contaminating food. 2.17 Meal Assembly - composing or placing food for one person in or on a suitable container, where it will be kept until delivery to the consumer. 2.18 Portioning - division of food before or after cooking into single or multiple portions. 2.19 Potentially Hazardous Food - food capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms. SECTION III - HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS IN PRODUCTION/HARVESTING AREA Are not covered in this Code. For raw material Requirements: See Section VII. SECTION IV -(A) PRODUCTION OR PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES This section covers the areas where the food is prepared, cooked, chilled, frozen and stored. 4.1 Location - Establishments should be located in areas which are free from objectionable odours, smoke, dust or other contaminants and are not subject to flooding. 4.2 Roadways and areas used by wheeled traffic - Roadways and areas serving the establishment which are within its boundaries or in its immediate vicinity should have a hard paved surface suitable for wheeled traffic. There should be adequate drainage and provision should be made to allow for cleaning. 4.3 Buildings and facilities 4.3.1 Buildings and facilities should be of sound construction and maintained in good repair. All construction materials should be such that they do not transmit any undesirable substances to the food. 4.3.2 Adequate working space should be provided to allow for satisfactory performance of all operations. 4.3.3 Buildings and facilities should be designed to permit easy and adequate cleaning and to facilitate proper supervision of food hygiene. 4.3.4 Building and facilities should be designed to prevent the entrance and harbouring of pests and the entry of environmental contaminants such as smoke, dust, etc. -- 4 of 18 -- CXC 39 Page 5 of 18 4.3.5 Buildings and facilities should be designed to provide separation, by partition, location or other effective means, between those operations which may cause cross contamination. Note: Cross-contamination is an important factor that contributes to foodborne outbreaks. Food can be contaminated with harmful organisms after cooking sometimes from a food handler, and often directly or indirectly from raw food. Operations such as the cleaning and washing of vegetables, the washing up of equipment, utensils, crockery and cutlery, and the unpacking, storage or refrigeration of raw materials should be performed in separate rooms or locations especially designed for that purpose. Managers and food inspectors should regularly check that the separation principle is properly applied. (See also CCP-Note in 4.4.1) 4.3.6 Buildings and facilities should be designed to facilitate hygienic operations by means of a controlled and regulated flow in the process from the arrival of the raw material at the premises to the finished product, and should provide for appropriate temperature for the process and product. 4.3.7 In food handling areas: - Floors, where appropriate, should be of waterproof, non-absorbent, washable, and non-slip materials without crevices, and should be easy to clean and disinfect. Where appropriate, floors should slope sufficiently for liquids to drain to trapped outlets. - Walls, where appropriate, should be of waterproof, non-absorbent and washable sealed materials and should be light coloured. Up to a height appropriate for the operation they should be smooth and without crevices, and should be easy to clean and disinfect. Where appropriate, angles between walls, between walls and floors, and between walls and ceilings should be sealed and coved to facilitate cleaning. - Ceilings should be designed, constructed and finished to prevent accumulation of dirt and minimize condensation, mould development and flaking, and should be easy to clean. - Windows and other openings should be constructed to avoid accumulation of dirt and those which open should be fitted with insect-proof screens. Screens should be easily movable for cleaning and kept in good repair. Internal window sills, if present, should be sloped to prevent use as shelves. - Doors should have smooth, non-absorbent surfaces and, be self-closing and close fitting. - Stairs, lift cages and auxiliary structures such as platforms, ladders, chutes, should be situated and constructed to prevent contamination to food. Chutes should be constructed with inspection and cleaning hatches. 4.3.8 In food handling areas all overhead structures and fittings should be installed in a manner to avoid contamination directly or indirectly of food and raw materials by condensation and drip, and should not hamper cleaning operations. They should be insulated where appropriate and be so designed and finished as to prevent the accumulation of dirt and to minimize condensation, mould development and flaking. They should be easy to clean. 4.3.9 Living quarters, toilets and areas where animals are kept should be completely separated from and should not open directly into food handling areas. 4.3.10 Where appropriate, establishments should be designed so that access can be controlled. -- 5 of 18 -- CXC 39 Page 6 of 18 4.3.11 The use of material which cannot be adequately cleaned and disinfected, such as wood, should be avoided unless its use would clearly not be a source of contamination. 4.3.12 Water Supply 4.3.12.1 An ample supply of water, in compliance with the WHO "Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality", under adequate pressure and of suitable temperature should be available with adequate facilities for its storage, where necessary, and distribution, and with adequate protection against contamination. Note: Samples should be taken regularly, but the frequency should depend upon the origin and the usage of the water, e.g. more frequent from private supplies than from public supplies. Chlorine or other suitable disinfectants may be used. If chlorination has been employed checks should be made daily by chemical tests for available chlorine. The point of sampling should preferably be at the point of usage, but occasionally it would be useful to sample at the point of entry of the water to the establishment. 4.3.12.2 There should be a system to ensure an adequate supply of hot potable water. 4.3.12.3 Ice shall be made from potable water and should be manufactured, handled and stored so as to protect it from contamination. 4.3.12.4 Steam used in direct contact with food or food contact surfaces should contain no substance which may be hazardous to health or may contaminate the food. 4.3.12.5 Non-potable water used for steam production, refrigeration, fire control and other similar purposes not connected with food should be carried in completely separate lines, identifiable preferably by colour, and with no cross-connection with or back-siphonage into the system carrying potable water. 4.3.13 Effluent and waste disposal. Establishments should have an efficient effluent and waste disposal system which should at all times be maintained in good order and repair. All effluent lines (including sewer systems) should be constructed to avoid contamination of potable water supplies. All wastepipes should be properly trapped and lead to a drain. 4.3.14 Refrigeration 4.3.14.1 Establishments should have refrigerating and/or freezing cabinets large enough to accommodate raw materials at adequate temperature in order to comply with the requirements of Section 7.1.4 and 7.1.5. Note: Cross contamination of pathogens from raw commodities to prepared foods frequently occurs in the refrigerator. Therefore, raw foods, particularly meat, poultry, liquid egg products, fish and shellfish, must be strictly separated from prepared foods, preferably by the use of different refrige