CODE OF PRACTICE FOR WEED CONTROL TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PYRROLIZIDINE ALKALOID CONTAMINATION IN FOOD AND FEED CXC 74-2014 -- 1 of 7 -- CXC 74-2014 2 1. INTRODUCTION Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) are natural toxins occurring in a wide variety of plants. Over 6 000 plant species throughout the world are expected to contain PAs. PAs are probably the most widely distributed natural toxins that can affect wildlife, livestock and humans. PAs have a common toxicity profile with the liver being the main target organ of toxicity. Major signs of toxicity in all animal species include various degrees of progressive liver damage (centrilobular hepatocellular necrosis), and veno-occlusive disease. Furthermore, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has classified three PAs, lasiocarpine, monocrotaline and riddelliine, as ‘possibly carcinogenic to humans’ (Group 2B). PAs may differ in potency, the relative potencies are currently not known due to lack of oral toxicity data on individual PAs, which hampers risk assessment for PAs. Risks to humans may arise from the intake of PA contaminated food of vegetable or animal origin and outbreaks of toxicity in farm animals cause economic losses to farmers and rural communities. Direct human cases of poisoning via food are well-documented, which in some cases have resulted in deaths. Also, consumption of grain or grain products (flour or bread) contaminated with PA-containing seeds has caused outbreaks of poisoning. Further, plant parts which contain PAs have been identified in foods prepared from agricultural crops, i.e. salad leaves. PAs were also found in products from animal origin, i.e. milk and eggs, indicating transfer of PAs from feed to edible tissues. Although there are gaps in the information available on the toxicity and relative potency of individual PAs, and the contribution of different foods to overall exposure, dietary exposure to PAs should be as low as possible due to the potential health-threatening effects that can be caused by ingestion of these toxins via feed or food. To achieve this, management practices aimed at the prevention and reduction of contamination of food and feed with PAs must be undertaken. Management practices to prevent or reduce PA contamination of food and feed can comprise weed management (removal/reduction) practices to reduce exposure of food-producing animals, including livestock and bees, to PA- containing plants, and practices to reduce presence of PAs in raw and processed commodities. This Code of Practice focuses on weed control. Deliberate use of PA-containing plants for foods and feed cannot be justified for any reason without appropriate assessment. It should be emphasised that total eradication of PA-containing plants is not feasible or ecologically desirable. Also, grazing animals usually avoid eating most growing plant species containing PAs under normal circumstances. Generally, livestock graze on PA-containing plants when feed gets scarce in conditions of drought or on over-grazed pastures. Livestock may also consume PA-containing plants when they are present in dried form in feed. Therefore, good feeding practice is important besides management through weed control. 2. OBJECTIVE This Code of Practice aims to provide good management practices for weed control of PA-containing plants to prevent and reduce the contamination of food and feed with PAs. In this regard, this code will cover control measures for the management of the PA-containing plant as well as measures for control of plant release and spread. 3. SCOPE The scope of this Code of Practice is to provide guidance to prevent contamination of food and feed with PAs on the one hand and, where contamination cannot be completely avoided, to reduce the PA contamination in food and feed by weed control. This Code of Practice should be read in conjunction with other relevant Codes of Practice for the prevention and reduction of other contaminants in food and feed. 4. EVALUATION OF COMPLIANCE WITH RELEVANT LEGISLATION All management practices presented in this Code of Practice shall be followed in compliance with relevant national or international legislation and standards, including general requirement for consumer and worker protection. 5. LIMITATIONS It should be recognised that the implementation of the management measures described in this Code of Practice may be difficult in a number of countries. This may be either due to lack of knowledge or resources or due to geographical, environmental or practical limitations, such as the area of land being too large, or inaccessibility of certain regions for agricultural machinery. The measures described in this Code of Practice serve therefore as guidance and each measure described in this Code of Practice should be assessed by national authorities or other professional and advisory bodies to ensure that it is appropriate and practical for their country-specific conditions. -- 2 of 7 -- CXC 74-2014 3 There is currently insufficient information concerning the effectiveness of the various management measures and therefore no full evaluation of the management measures can be conducted. When such information becomes available, an evaluation of the effectiveness of the proposed management measures would be helpful in identifying the most appropriate combination of practices for management of PA-containing plants thereby lowering the chance of PA-contamination of food and feed. 6. GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR WEED CONTROL OF PA-CONTAINING PLANTS To ensure adequate prevention of the spread of PA-containing plants, and to lower the costs of control measures, early detection and identification of these plants is essential followed by action to prevent contamination of food and feed. To achieve an early detection, raising awareness by providing good information to the farmers and local population (including contractors and roadside maintenance staff) is critical. Information could be provided by using materials such as leaflets and website information with an overview and description of the most important PA-containing plants, their ecology, the need to proceed to action and how/where. In this respect, it is important to adapt the type of recommendations to the situation of the person involved, i.e. private persons keeping horses, sheep etc. on a small piece of land need other instructions than professional farmers. Communication with relevant national and local government organisations should also take place. Once PA-containing plants are detected, if suitable data are available, the risks for human and animal health must be established in order to identify the need for an integrated weed management plan. In this respect, it must be recognised that the different PA-containing plants may react in a different way to a particular management measure. Therefore, it is always important to keep the ecology of the specific plant in mind. Additionally, influences of weather or climate must be taken into account. When seeking to prevent the spread of the PA-containing plants, all landowners, occupiers and managers must take a collective responsibility to ensure that effective control of the spread is achieved. 7. EVALUATION OF THE NEED TO PROCEED TO ACTION Before considering any action, the need to proceed to action should be established by identifying the risks posed by the presence of PA-containing plants. This could be done by setting up a tiered risk characterisation approach based on:  toxicity of the particular PAs, if known, present in the plant;  the relevant contributions of the various PA-containing plants to the specific or total PA intake of the livestock or presence in food/feed, if known;  proximity of the PA-containing plants to arable fields and meadows/pastures/grasslands;  level of infestation;  local circumstances;  climate;  soil type; and  vegetation cover of receiving land. The likelihood of PA-containing plants spreading to land used for agricultural practices or grazing and/or feed/forage production should be the determining factor for assessment of the risk. As an example, principles for assessing and managing the risk posed to livestock by ragwort (Jacobaea vulgaris), a common PA-containing plant, have been identified. These have been based on practical considerations of the proximity of the ragwort to pastures for livestock (bullet 3 above):  high risk: ragwort is present and flowering/seeding within 50 m of land used for grazing by food- producing animals or land used for feed/forage production;  medium risk: ragwort is present within 50 m to 100 m of land used for grazing by food-producing animals or land used for feed/forage production;  low risk: the land on which ragwort is present is more than 100 m from land used for grazing by food- producing animals or land used for feed/forage production. -- 3 of 7 -- CXC 74-2014 4 In the example of ragwort control, when a “high risk” situation is identified, the guidance is that immediate action should be taken to control the spread of PA-containing plants using appropriate control techniques taking account of the status of the land. In case of a medium risk, a control policy may be established to ensure that when the situation changes from a medium to a high risk of spread, it is identified and dealt with in a timely manner using appropriate control techniques taking account of the status of the land. In case of a low risk, no immediate action is required. Similar risk assessments and resulting actions could be carried out for other PA-containing plants, but noting that defining risk zones and appropriate actions in other situations, will require the different ecology of the relevant PA-containing plants to be taken into account alongside the bullets in paragraph 16. 8. RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 8.1 Management of the presence of PA-containing plants For managing the presence of PA-containing plants, preferably a combination of non-chemical and chemical methods, i.e. integrated weed management, should be applied to obtain the most effective results. The use of an integrated weed management plan could reduce the use of and reliance on herbicides, thereby lowering the chance of herbicide resistance, and allows weed management in most environments. However, it should be noted that in those cases where appropriate herbicides are available, their application alone could be sufficiently effective to manage weed presence. Furthermore, an integrated weed management plan should be accompanied with practices to reduce the spread of PA-containing plants thereby preventing infestations to spread. It should be kept in mind for the management practices described in this section that their application should not result in harmful consequences for agriculture, the livestock or the pasture. Some methods may be destructive for other plant species (such as the crop) as well as to the target species. Applying these methods must be directed to the eradication of individual plants and done after good planning taking into account possible risks to the environment. 8.1.1 Mechanical methods PA-containing plants can be controlled by mechanical methods such as pulling, ploughing, milling and slashing. The timing of applying mechanical methods is important. These practices are best applied before flowering of the PA-containing plants to prevent seed production and seed spread. When handling the PA-containing plants, suitable precautions should be taken to protect operators’ skin (contact with some plants might cause an allergic reaction) and prevent inhalation of pollen. Effective manual control requires removal of the root crown and all larger roots. Therefore, manual control may only be effective for seedlings and young rosettes in contrast to bigger plants, which normally develop deep roots. In addition, effective hand pulling is useful for small infestations but is not cost-effective for large ones, nor is it suitable for large areas of land. In case of hand pulling, the plants should be handled and transported in a manner that prevents their spread, e.g. in hermetically sealed bags, and destroyed (burned) afterwards. It should be noted that disturbance of the soil may lead to more germination since buried seeds will be exposed to (sun) light. 8.1.2 Chemical methods When applied carefully at the recommended dose of the herbicide, chemical spraying with appropriate herbicides may be an effective way of controlling PA-containing plants. Herbicides used should be registered for application in that specific situation. Also, herbicides should preferably be used in combination with other control methods to increase their effectiveness. The choice of herbicide depends on the specific PA-containing plant species and availability of appropriate herbicides. For most PA-containing plants, in general the most effective time to spray herbicides is when the plants are actively growing and commencing flowering, i.e. in the spring before bloom and in the autumn applied to the new rosettes. Some herbicides require other timing due to their mode of action. PA-containing plants should not be sprayed when the plants are stressed either through lack of water, too much water, disease, insect or mechanical damage, as spray effectiveness will diminish. The use of non-selective herbicides may damage the crop species and surrounding crops, pastures and environment. Hence, it is better to use selective herbicides or limit the use of non-selective herbicides for spray topping the PA-containing plant. Further, some PA-containing plants may develop resistance against a particular herbicide over time. It should be ensured that active substances are registered for the specific purpose in each country. In addition, as these substances are herbicides they may still have an inhibiting effect on crops, so care should be taken in case of possible bordering arable land. -- 4 of 7 -- CXC 74-2014 5 In case of established PA-containing perennial plants, it is better to use systemic herbicides. Systemic herbicides are absorbed either by roots or foliar parts of a plant and are then translocated within the plant system to tissues that may be remote from the point of application. In addition, care should be taken that herbicides are applied in suitable weather conditions, since the effective concentration of herbicides could be reduced when applied in unfavourable weather conditions, such as rain falls within 5 hours of application. 8.1.3 Biological methods Natural enemies of a plant may be used to control PA-containing plants. It may be an economical and effective method. However, efficacy must have been established and the natural enemy must not present an environmental problem itself. Tansy ragwort (Jacobaea vulgaris) densities may for example be reduced by the natural enemies Longitarsus jacobaeae (ragwort flea beetle) and a combination of Longitarsus jacobaeae and Tyria jacobaeae (cinnabar moth). Also Cochylis atricapitana