CXC 22-1979 Page 1 of 17 CODE OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR GROUNDNUTS (PEANUTS) CXC 22-1979 1. SCOPE 1.1 This Code of Hygienic Practice applies to groundnuts, also known as peanuts, monkey nuts or earth nuts (Arachis hypogaea L). It contains the minimum requirements of hygiene for farm handling, transportation, storage, in-shell operations and commercial shelling. It covers all types and forms of raw, dried groundnuts (peanuts) in-shell and shelled. 2. DESCRIPTION 2.1 Definitions Blows (pops) means in-shell nuts which are unusually light-weight due to extensive damage from physiological, mould, insect, or other causes and which can be removed, for example, by an air-separation process. 2.2 Curing means drying of in-shell groundnuts (peanuts) to a safe moisture level. 2.3 Farmer's stock groundnuts (peanuts) means in-shell groundnuts (peanuts) as they come from the farm, after separation from the vines by hand and/or mechanical means. 2.4 Safe water activity means a water activity of in-shell and shelled groundnuts (peanuts) that will prevent growth of micro-organisms normal to the nut harvesting, processing and storage environment. Water activity (aw) is a measure of free moisture in a product and is the water vapour pressure of the substance divided by the vapour pressure of pure water at the same temperature. An aw exceeding 0.70 at 25C (77F) is unsafe. 3. HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS IN PRODUCTION/HARVESTING AREAS 3.1 Environmental Hygiene in Areas from which Raw Materials are derived 3.1.1 Unsuitable growing or harvesting areas Food should not be grown or harvested where the presence of potentially harmful substances would lead to an unacceptable level of such substances in the food. -- 1 of 17 -- CXC 22-1979 Page 2 of 17 3.1.2 Protection from contamination by wastes Adequate precautions should be taken to ensure that human and animal wastes are disposed of in such a manner as not to constitute a public health or hygiene hazard, and extreme care should be taken to protect the products from contamination with these wastes. Vine and groundnuts waste should not be permitted to accumulate in such a manner as to promote mould growth or to attract rodents or insects. 3.1.3 Irrigation control Food should not be grown or produced in areas where the water used for irrigation might constitute a health hazard to the consumer through the food. 3.1.4 Pest and disease control Control measures involving treatment with chemical, physical or biological agents should only be undertaken by or under direct supervision of personnel who have a thorough understanding of the potential hazards to health, particularly those which may arise from residues in the food. Such measures should only be carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the official agency having jurisdiction. 3.2 Harvesting and Production 3.2.1 Curing After being dug, pods should be exposed for maximum rate of drying. This may be accomplished by turning the vines to leave the pods uppermost where they are away from the ground and exposed to sun and wind. Curing should be completed as rapidly as possible to a safe water activity so as to prevent growth of micro- organisms, particularly moulds that produce aflatoxins. When curing by supplemental heat,excessive heat should be avoided since this impairs the general quality of the nuts, e.g. splitting of kernels after shelling. Close checks of moisture content or water activity of lots of farmer's stock groundnuts should be maintained. (see sub-section 7.8.2.1 for relationship between safe water activity and moisture level measurements). 3.2.2 Techniques Methods and procedures associated with harvesting and production should be hygienic and such as not to constitute a potential health hazard or result in contamination of the product. 3.2.3 Equipment and containers Equipment and containers used for harvesting and production should be so constructed and maintained as not to constitute a hazard to health. Containers which are re-used should be of such material and construction as will permit easy and thorough cleaning. They should be cleaned and maintained clean and, where necessary, disinfected. Containers previously used for toxic materials should not subsequently be used for holding foods or food ingredients. 3.2.4 Removal of obviously unfit materials Damaged or imperfect groundnuts and lots that contain any obvious contamination with human or -- 2 of 17 -- CXC 22-1979 Page 3 of 17 animal wastes, insect infestation, decomposition, broken shells, embedded dirt, blows, or other defects to an extent which would render them unfit for human consumption, should be segregated during harvesting and production to the fullest extent practicable. Such segregated unfit groundnuts should be disposed of in such a place and in such a manner as to avoid contamination of sound nuts, water supplies, or other crops. 3.2.5 Protection of groundnuts from contamination Suitable precautions should be taken to protect the nuts from contamination by domestic animals, rodents, birds, insects, mites and other arthropods, or other biological agents, or with chemical or other objectionable substances during handling and storage. The nuts should be moved to suitable storage, or to the processing area for immediate processing, as soon as possible after harvesting or drying. Where nuts are likely to become infested with insects, mites (and other arthropods) during or after harvesting, suitable treatment such as fumigation or application of a pesticide spray should be carried out as a preventive measure. Nuts should be stored in covered containers, buildings, or under covering (e.g. pyramid stacking). Fumigation or spray methods and chemicals used should be approved by the official agency having jurisdiction. High humidities which are conducive to proliferation of mould and elaboration of aflatoxins should be avoided in storage areas in order to maintain groundnuts at a safe moisture level (see sub-section 7.8.2). 3.3 Transportation 3.3.1 Conveyances Conveyances for transporting the harvested crop from the place of harvest or storage should be adequate for the purpose intended and should be of such material and construction as will permit thorough cleaning and treatment with pesticides and should be so cleaned and maintained as not to constitute a source of contamination to the product. In addition, bulk transport such as ship or rail car should be well ventilated with dry air to remove moisture resulting from respiration of the grounds nuts and to prevent moisture condensation as the vehicle moves from warm to cool regions or from day to night. 3.3.2 Handling procedures All handling procedures should be such as will prevent the product from becoming contaminated. Extreme care should be taken in transporting groundnuts with an unsafe moisture level to prevent spoilage or deterioration. (See also applicable parts of sub-section 7.8.2.1). 3.4 Shelling Plant 3.4.1 Purchasing of farmer's stock Most of the damage may have already been done to the groundnuts during growing, harvesting, curing, handling and storage. A buyer for a shelling plant, whether located at the plant or at an outlying commission buying point, should monitor the quality of ground nut lots offered to him, and with the Government advisory agencies assist suppliers in eliminating improper practices. Buyers should encourage suppliers of farmer's stock groundnuts to follow good production practices as described herein. 3.4.2 Receiving and inspection Farmer's stock groundnuts received at the shelling plant should be inspected on arrival. It is advisable to know the origin and history of each lot of groundnuts. The transport vehicle should be examined for cleanliness, -- 3 of 17 -- CXC 22-1979 Page 4 of 17 insect infestation, dampness or unusual odours. If the vehicle is not fully enclosed, it should have available a covering such as a tarpaulin to keep out the rain or other forms of water. The general appearance of the groundnuts should be observed during the process of unloading. If the groundnuts are wet to the touch, insect infested, insect damaged, or contain an unusual amount of dirt, debris or other foreign material, they should not be co-mingled with known good groundnuts in a bulk warehouse. The vehicle which contains groundnuts should be set aside until a decision is made for their disposal. If possible, remove a sample from each lot, separate the "loose shelled" kernels and shell the remainder for groundnuts grade observation before an acceptance decision is made. Examine all loose shelled , damaged and under-sized kernels for possible presence of mould. If no external mould is seen, split the kernels to disclose possible hidden mould growth. Excessive mould or presence of mould resembling A. flavus warrants a chemical test for aflatoxin or rejection of the lot. If the groundnuts are to be stored in a bulk warehouse or storage bin, the warehouse or bin should be thoroughly cleaned of all debris and extraneous material and fumigated or otherwise treated with a pesticide before use, if necessary. Groundnuts should not be stored in a warehouse containing any openings which may permit entrance of rodents or birds or which may have leaks in the roof or walls that can allow the rain to enter. The warehouse should be checked frequently for leaks or infestation, both before and after filling. To prevent condensation drippage, warehouses should be ventilated as, for example, by screening around tops or eaves. (see also sub-section 7.1.2). 3.4.3 Unloading equipment and area Unloading equipment such as an unloading hopper, conveyor belt, bucket elevator, and dirt removing equipment should be so designed as to prevent accumulation of debris. Only areas which can be easily inspected and cleaned should be used for processing groundnuts. A programme of periodic cleaning together with preventive pest control measures should be carried out. Groundnuts should be handled so as to avoid cracking or tearing of hulls which may permit damage to the kernels. 3.4.4 Precleaning The maximum possible amount of dust and dirt should be removed from the farmer's stock groundnuts before they enter the shelling plant. Sand screens and aspirators will take out much of the dust and dirt and improve the overall sanitation of the shelling plant. The maximum possible amount of foreign material, loose shell, loose kernels and blows should be removed. Foreign material not removed by the cleaner can cause mechanical problems by clogging the sheller, as well as by requiring more picking and sorting of the shelled groundnuts. Removal of loose kernels and blows before shelling will improve the quality of the groundnuts as well as the sheller and plant performance. 3.4.5 Shelling and sizing All foreign material should be removed from the shelled groundnuts (using stoners, magnets, sorters, etc.). The shelled groundnuts should be continuously inspected to determine whether the plant equipment is performing properly and the groundnuts are free of foreign material, damage and contamination. Any equipment adjustments indicated by the inspection should be made promptly. Once the shelled groundnuts are size graded, additional stoning should be done in order to remove small light stones, dirt balls and other foreign material which could not be removed in the farm stock stoners. Special care should be taken to avoid overloading size grading equipment. 3.4.6 Sorting -- 4 of 17 -- CXC 22-1979 Page 5 of 17 Sorting is the final step for removing debris and defective kernels. It can be done by hand picking or photo-electric sorting machines or a combination of both. Sorting belts should be well lighted, loaded no more than one layer deep, and operated at a speed and with the number of sorters to assure removal of foreign material and defective kernels. Photo-electric sorting machines should be adjusted as often as practicable against standards selected to assure removal of foreign material and defective kernels. Adjustment should be checked frequently and regularly. One contaminated kernel may contain sufficient aflatoxin to endanger as many as 10.000 co-mingled kernels. Foreign material and defective kernels (mouldy, discoloured, rancid, decayed, shrivelled, insect or otherwise damaged) should be bagged separately - and tagged as unsuitable for human or animal consumption. Containers of defective groundnuts should be removed as soon as practicable from the processing room. Materials which carry the danger of contamination by aflatoxin, or which are contaminated, should be detoxified or destroyed. 3.4.7 Cleaning of special areas 3.4.7.1 Boots or wells of elevators accumulate groundnuts and ground nut material. Accumulated material should be removed and the boots/wells cleaned and sprayed and/ or fumigated as necessary to prevent insect and rodent infestation. Fumigation or spray methods and chemicals used should be approved by the official agency having jurisdiction. 3.4.7.2 Canvas conveyor belts will accumulate product between belt and conveyor pan. Pulleys can accumulate crushed material. Underside of moulding on conveyors can accumulate particles of groundnuts. These areas should be cleaned and sprayed and/or fumigated on a regular basis to prevent insect and rodent infestation. 3.4.7.3 Storage and surge hoppers should be cleaned and sprayed between runs. 3.4.7.4 Every piece of machinery whether open or enclosed should be cleaned of lodged material on a regular schedule. 3.4.7.5 The area immediately surrounding the plant should be kept clean of all debris that might attract insects, rodents or birds and subjected to an adequate pest control programme. 3.4.7.6 Dry clean-up procedures should be utilized to avoid wet spots in which micro-organisms can propagate and contaminate contacted groundnuts kernels. Even though water may not be used directly on equipment, spray and elevated humidity from continuous use can increase moisture in organic matter trapped in crevices in equipment, such as conveyors, to the point where micro-organisms can proliferate. 4. ESTABLISHMENT: DESIGN AND FACILITIES 4.1 Location Establishments should be located in areas which are free from objectionable odours, smoke, dust or other contaminants and are not subject to flooding. 4.2 Roadways and Areas used by Wheeled Traffic Such roadways and areas serving the establishment which are within its boundaries or in its immediate vicinity should have a hard paved surface suitable for wheeled traffic. There should be adequate drainage and provision should be made to allow for cleaning. 4.3 Buildings and Facilities -- 5 of 17 -- CXC 22-1979 Page 6 of 17 4.3.1 Buildings and facilities should be of sound construction and maintained in good repair. 4.3.2 Adequate working space should be provided to allow for satisfactory performance of all operations. 4.3.3 The design should be such as to permit easy and adequate cleaning and to facilitate proper supervision of food hygiene. 4.