GUIDELINES FOR THE CONTROL OF TRICHINELLA SPP. IN MEAT OF SUIDAE CAC/GL 86-2015 Adopted in 2015. -- 1 of 5 -- CAC/GL 86-2015 2 1. INTRODUCTION Trichinellosis is a parasitic disease of major public health and economic importance in some countries. Human infection occurs from the consumption of raw or undercooked meat of many species (e.g. domestic pig, horse, game) containing infective Trichinella spp. larvae. Meat from animals of the family of Suidae (further referred to as "Suidae") is considered to be the most important means of transmission of Trichinella spp. to humans. The infection status of domestic pig populations is informed by knowledge of management practices and data from monitoring programs for live (serological survey) or slaughtered pigs. Human health data can also be used to support the determination of risk of exposure to Trichinella spp. Post-slaughter control measures to protect consumers from exposure to Trichinella spp. in the meat of Suidae should be risk-based. These Guidelines incorporate elements of the “risk management framework” (RMF) approach as developed by the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene for managing microbiological hazards (Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CAC/GL 63-2007)) such as:  Preliminary risk management activities;  Identification and selection of risk management options;  Implementation of control measures;  Monitoring and review. 2. OBJECTIVES The primary objective of these Guidelines is to provide guidance to governments and industry on risk-based control measures to prevent exposure of humans to Trichinella spp. in meat of Suidae. The Guidelines provide a consistent and transparent technical basis for reviewing and implementing control measures based on epidemiological information and risk analysis. The risk-based control measures that are selected vary between countries and production systems. Measures applied at the national level should be taken into account in the judgement of equivalence1 by importing countries, thereby facilitating international trade. 3. SCOPE AND USE OF THE GUIDELINES 3.1. Scope These Guidelines address only the control of Trichinella spp. in meat from Suidae as this is considered the most important source of infection of humans. The control of Trichinella spp. in meat from other species (e.g. horses, bears, walrus, etc.) should however be taken into account where considered relevant to the control of Trichinella spp. in meat from Suidae. These Guidelines apply to the control of all species and genotypes of Trichinella that may infect Suidae and cause foodborne disease. The Guidelines are based on the Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in the Framework of the Codex Alimentarius2 and the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005) that provides generic advice on a risk-based approach to meat hygiene. These Guidelines used in conjunction with the OIE recommendations (Chapter 8.15 Infection with Trichinella spp. of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code), apply to all steps from primary production to consumption. 3.2. Use These Guidelines, used in conjunction with the OIE recommendations (Chapter 8.15 Infection with Trichinella spp of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code), provide specific guidance for control of Trichinella in meat of Suidae with potential control measures being considered at each step, or group of steps, in the food chain. The Guidelines are supplementary to and should be used in conjunction with the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1–1969), the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005), the Code of Practice for the Processing and Handling of Quick Frozen Foods (CAC/RCP 8-1976), the FAO/WHO/OIE Guidelines for the Surveillance, Management, Prevention and Control of Trichinellosis3 and the Recommendations on Methods for the Control of Trichinella in Domestic and Wild Animals Intended for Human Consumption prepared by the International Commission on Trichinellosis (ICT) Standards for Control Guidelines Committee4. 1 Guidelines on the Judgement of Equivalence Sanitary Measures associated with Food Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 53-2003) 2 http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/006/Y4800E/y4800e0o.htm 3 http://www.trichinellosis.org/uploads/FAO-WHO-OIE_Guidelines.pdf 4 http://www.med.unipi.it/ict/ICT%20Recommendations%20for%20Control.English.pdf -- 2 of 5 -- CAC/GL 86-2015 3 The diagnostic techniques referred to in these Guidelines are those of the OIE Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals (Chapter 2.1.16 Trichinellosis). Flexibility in application is an essential element of these Guidelines. They are primarily intended for use by government risk managers and industry in the design and implementation of food control systems. These Guidelines could also be used when judging the equivalence5 of different food safety measures for meat of Suidae in different countries for international trade purposes. These Guidelines provide a framework for decisions regarding post-slaughter control measures to protect humans from consumption of meat of Suidae which may be infected with Trichinella spp. Pre-harvest preventative measures, prerequisite criteria and conditions for recognition of compartments of domestic pigs as negligible risk are described in Chapter 8.15 Infection with Trichinella spp of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code. 4. DEFINITIONS Compartment6 means an animal subpopulation contained in one or more establishments under a common biosecurity management system with a distinct health status with respect to a specific disease or specific diseases for which required surveillance, control and biosecurity measures have been applied for the purpose of international trade. Cross breeds means the progeny of domestic pigs with non-domesticated animals of the family Suidae. Domestic pigs means domesticated animals of the family Suidae living in a managed production system. Feral pigs means an animal of a domesticated species of the family Suidae that now lives without direct human supervision or control. Finishing pigs means domestic pigs kept solely for meat production. Reservoir wildlife6 means feral animals, captive wild animals and wild animals that are known to be the most important potential direct or indirect sources of infection for Trichinella spp. to domestic pigs in a region or country. 5. PRINCIPLES APPLIED TO CONTROL OF TRICHINELLA SPP. IN MEAT OF SUIDAE Overarching principles for good hygienic practice for meat are presented in the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005) section 4: General Principles of Meat Hygiene. Three principles that have particularly been taken into account in these Guidelines are: i. The principles of food safety risk analysis should be incorporated wherever possible and appropriate in the design and implementation of meat hygiene programmes. ii. As appropriate to the circumstances, the results of monitoring and surveillance of animal and human populations should be considered with subsequent review and/or modification of meat hygiene requirements whenever necessary. iii. Competent authorities should recognise the equivalence of alternative hygiene control measures where appropriate, and promulgate meat hygiene measures that achieve required outcomes in terms of safety and suitability and facilitate fair practices in the trading of meat. 6. PRELIMINARY RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES Consumers are exposed to the risk of Trichinella spp. infection when they consume meat containing infectious larvae. Risk management activities should incorporate a “primary production-to-consumption” approach in order to identify all steps in the food-chain where control measures are required. Preliminary risk management activities appropriate to these Guidelines include:  Development of a national, regional, or compartment risk profile noting that a generic risk profile which takes into account the FAO/WHO/OIE Guidelines for the Surveillance, Management, Prevention and Control of Trichinellosis 3 has been published.  Evaluation of the epidemiological evidence supporting a negligible risk claim for domestic pigs consumed domestically or abroad. 5 Guidelines on the Judgement of Equivalence Sanitary Measures associated with Food Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 53-2003) 6 Definition in the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code. -- 3 of 5 -- CAC/GL 86-2015 4 7. AVAILABILITY AND SELECTION OF RISK-BASED CONTROL MEASURES 7.1 Availability of control measures at herd level Measures to prevent Trichinella infection in domestic pig herds and to establish a compartment of negligible risk are described in Chapter 8.15 Infection with Trichinella spp. of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code. 7.2 Availability of post-slaughter control measures Post-slaughter control measures for Trichinella spp. include: laboratory testing and follow-up actions, freezing and heat treatment. Irradiation of meat of Suidae is also an option to destroy Trichinella spp. in meat prior to consumption. Control measures should be validated and then be approved by the competent authority, as appropriate. Non-weaned pigs slaughtered below the age of 5 weeks may be derogated from post-slaughter control measures7 when there is relevant information that can be verified by the competent authority. Inactivation of Trichinella spp. by curing should follow the recommendations of ICT8. 7.2.1 Laboratory testing and follow-up actions When laboratory tests are performed on individual carcasses, those selected analytical methods should be in accordance with the diagnostic techniques recommended in Chapter 2.1.16. Trichinellosis of the OIE Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals (digestion assays) and the ICT Recommendations for Quality Assurance in Digestion Testing Programmes for Trichinella9 or ISO\CEN standards. Any analytical method that is selected should have known performance characteristics, i.e. sensitivity and specificity, if a risk-based approach to ensuring food safety is to be applied. If a Trichinella-positive carcass is identified during post-slaughter testing, the competent authority should be notified. The competent authority can then decide which follow-up actions are necessary including possible disposal of the carcass. 7.2.2 Freezing Freezing of meat should utilise cooling regime parameters that ensure lethality for all Trichinella spp. present in different portions of meat or whole carcasses. Use of this method for inactivation of Trichinella spp. that are not cold tolerant should be in accordance with validated parameters such as those described in the "Recommendations on Methods for the Control of Trichinella in Domestic and Wild Animals Intended for Human Consumption" prepared by the ICT Standards for Control Guidelines. Freezing should not be used as a control measure in regions where Trichinella species and genotypes that are known to be cold tolerant such as Trichinella T6, T. britovi, and T. nativa, are endemic. 7.2.3 Heat treatment or irradiation Inactivation of Trichinella spp. by these methods should be performed in accordance with validated methods such as those described in the "Recommendations on Methods for the Control of Trichinella in Domestic and Wild Animals Intended for Human Consumption" prepared by the ICT Standards for Control Guidelines Committee. Guidance on irradiation is given in the General Standard on Irradiated Food (CODEX STAN 106- 1983) and the Code of Practice for Radiation Processing of Food (CAC/RCP 19-1979). 7.3 Selection of risk-based control measures With the establishment of the negligible risk compartment as described in Chapter 8.15 Infection with Trichinella spp. of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code, including consideration of the level of public health protection provided, the competent authority may provide derogation from specific post-slaughter controls or change the level of application of specific post-slaughter controls.10 8. IMPLEMENTATION OF RISK-BASED MEASURES Implementation of selected control measures is dependent on official recognition by the competent authority of the Trichinella status of the compartment. 7http://www.aesan.msssi.gob.es/AESAN/docs/docs/evaluacion_riesgos/comite_cientifico/ingles/TRICHINELLA_SUCKLI NG_PIG.pdf 8 Validated methods for curing are currently under development by ICT 9 http://www.trichinellosis.org/uploads/Part_1_final__-_QA_Recomendations_7Feb2012.pdf 10 Illustrations of the levels of public health protection that can be achieved when establishing a compartment with negligible risk are provided by FAO and WHO. (ftp://ftp.fao.org/codex/meetings/CCFH/ccfh46/Trichinella%20Mtg%20Report%20241014.pdf ). -- 4 of 5 -- CAC/GL 86-2015 5 9. MONITORING AND REVIEW After establishing a negligible risk compartment according to Chapter 8.15 Infection with Trichinella spp. of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code, ongoing assurance of public health protection should be based on avoiding Trichinella spp. contaminated meat from going into commerce. Public health protection can be assured by: a) a review of evidence, in particular from audits of herds, demonstrating compliance with the conditions as described in Article 8.15.5 of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code; or b) a risk based slaughter surveillance programme that takes into account information from historical testing results and is supplemented by regular review of information from audits of herds within the compartment; or c) a slaughter surveillance programme incorporating current testing data demonstrating that prevalence of infection does not exceed 1 infected carcass per 1,000,000 pigs slaughtered with at least 95% confidence. In addition to the above, epidemiological investigation of human trichinellosis cases to confirm that the source of the contaminated meat was not from a negligible risk compartment according to Chapter 8.15 Infection with Trichinella spp. of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code should be conducted to the extent possible. Where applicable and available, slaughter and any other relevant data from outdoor pigs and wild animals can provide additional information on the conditions surrounding the negligible risk compartment and the potential for infection of animals within the compartment. 10. NON-DOMESTICATED SUIDAE, FERAL PIGS AND CROSS-BREEDS All meat derived from non-domesticated Suidae, including wild boars, feral pigs and cross-breeds intended for human consumption should come from animals: a) tested in accordance with the diagnostic techniques recommended in the OIE Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals (digestion assays); or b) be processed to ensure the inactivation of Trichinella spp. in accordance with one of the methods in section 7.2, validated and approved for post-slaughter control in these animals. Positive carcasses should be disposed of according to recommendations of the competent auth