Adopted 2008. Editorial amendments 2013. GUIDELINES FOR THE VALIDATION OF FOOD SAFETY CONTROL MEASURES CAC/GL 69 - 2008 I. INTRODUCTION The control of hazards potentially associated with foods typically involves the application of control measures in the food chain, from primary production, through processing, to consumption. In the current environment of systems-based food safety controls that provide flexibility with the selection of control measures, validation of these control measures acquires increased importance. It is through the validation process that one demonstrates that the selected control measures are actually capable, on a consistent basis, of achieving the intended level of hazard control. It is important to make a clear distinction between the role of industry1 and the role of the competent authority in validating control measures. Industry is responsible for validation of control measures, while the competent authority ensures that industry has effective systems for validation and that control measures are appropriately validated. Governments may provide guidance to industry on how to conduct validation studies and how validated control measures may be implemented. Governments or international organizations may also conduct validation studies in support of risk management decisions or provide information on control measures considered to be validated, especially where the resources are not available to conduct such studies (e.g. small and less-developed businesses). These guidelines present information on the concept and nature of validation, tasks prior to validation, the validation process, and the need for re-validation. These guidelines also address the difference between validation, monitoring and verification. Annex I provides examples of validation scenarios which are for purpose of illustration only and which do not represent actual validation of control measures and which do not have global application. II. SCOPE These guidelines apply to validation of control measures at any stage of the food chain2. These guidelines are intended as guidance to industry and governments on the validation of individual control measures, a limited combination of control measures, or sets of control measure combinations forming a food safety control system (e.g. HACCP, GHP). The tools, techniques, and statistical principles that would be used to validate specific food safety control measures are beyond the scope of the current document. Advice on specific applications should be acquired from scientific organizations, competent authorities, process control experts or related sources of scientific expertise that can provide the specific principles and best practices upon which the validation of a specific control measure should be based. III. DEFINITIONS3 Control Measure: Any action and activity that can be used to prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an acceptable level.4 Food Safety Control System: The combination of control measures that, when taken as whole, ensures that food is safe for its intended use. Monitoring: The act of conducting a planned sequence of observations or measurements of control parameters to assess whether a control measure is under control.5 Validation: Obtaining evidence that a control measure or combination of control measures, if properly implemented, is capable of controlling the hazard to a specified outcome.6 1 For the purposes of this document, it is understood that industry includes all relevant sectors associated with the production, storage and handling of food, from primary production through retail and food service level (adapted from Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in the Framework of Codex Alimentarius and taken from Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CAC/GL 63-2007). 2 The focus of this document is the validation of elements of a food safety control system; however, the recommendations in this document also may be applied in the validation of other food hygiene measures. 3 In many cases, existing definitions such as those contained in the SPS Agreement, the General Principles of Food Hygiene, HACCP Annex and the CCFH Risk Management document, were suitable for use in this document. In other cases, where a definition was too limiting outside of its original context (e.g. some HACCP Annex definitions), another definition was developed that was more suitable for use within the context of these guidelines. 4 General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), HACCP Annex. 5 Derived from the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), HACCP Annex, but was modified to apply to all control measures, whether or not a HACCP system is employed. 6 Ibid. -- 1 of 10 -- CAC/GL 69 – 2008 2 Verification: The application of methods, procedures, tests and other evaluations, in addition to monitoring, to determine whether a control measure is or has been operating as intended.7 IV. CONCEPT AND NATURE OF VALIDATION Validation focuses on the collection and evaluation of scientific, technical and observational information to determine whether control measures are capable of achieving their specified purpose in terms of hazard control. Validation involves measuring performance against a desired food safety outcome or target, in respect of a required level of hazard control.8 Validation is performed at the time a control measure or a food safety control system is designed, or when changes indicate the need for re-validation (see section VII). Validation of control measures is, whenever possible, performed before their full implementation. Interrelationships among Validation, Monitoring and Verification There is often confusion among the concepts of validation, monitoring and verification. Validation of control measures as described in this document is different from monitoring and verification, which both take place after the validated control measures have been implemented. Monitoring and verification are the tools used to check whether the control measures are being adhered to and to demonstrate that they are operating as intended. - Monitoring of control measures is the on-going collection of information at the step the control measure is applied. The information establishes that the measure is functioning as intended, i.e., within established limits. Monitoring activities are typically focused on “real-time” measurements and on the performance of a specific control measure. - Verification is an ongoing activity used to determine that the control measures have been implemented as intended. Verification occurs during or after operation of a control measure through a variety of activities, including observation of monitoring activities and review of records to confirm that implementation of control measures is according to design. The following example for uncooked fermented sausages illustrates the interrelationship of validation, verification and monitoring: - Validation: The competent authority established the need for control measure(s) that achieve a specified log reduction in pathogenic Escherichia coli. The validation process indicated that industry could consistently achieve a specified log reduction through ensuring a specific decrease in pH during fermentation and a specific decrease in water activity during maturation, coupled with ensuring that the raw materials have less than a specified level of pathogenic E. coli based on statistically-based microbiological testing. - Monitoring: Measuring pH drop during fermentation and weight loss (or water activity) during maturation. - Verification: Periodic process control testing for pathogenic E. coli to verify that incoming levels in the raw materials are within specification and that fermentation and maturation achieve the intended outcome in the semi- finished or finished product. Examination of monitoring records to check for continuous control over time. V. TASKS PRIOR TO VALIDATION OF CONTROL MEASURES Prior to the validation of control measures by the food establishment, it is important to complete certain tasks so that validation can be accomplished effectively and efficiently. The following tasks could be carried out either independently or in conjunction with the establishment of GHPs, HACCP, etc. Tasks prior to validation include: a) Identify the hazards that are intended to be controlled in the commodity and/or environment concerned, taking into account all relevant information, including information from a risk assessment if available. b) Identify the food safety outcome required. The food safety outcome can be determined in a number of ways. Industry should determine if there are existing food safety outcomes or targets, established by the competent authority, relevant to the intended use of the food. In the absence of food safety outcomes or targets established by the competent authority, targets should be identified by industry, as appropriate. Industry may also set stricter targets than those set by the competent authority. c) Identify the measures that are to be validated, taking into account:  The importance of the control measure in achieving control of the hazard to a specified outcome. Examples might include: o Heat treatment step in a canning process 7 Ibid. 8 See Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CAC/GL 63-2007) and Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods (CAC/GL 21-1997). -- 2 of 10 -- CAC/GL 69 – 2008 3 o Cooling to a specified temperature within a specific timeframe  Whether the control measure has already been validated Identify whether the control measure has previously been validated in a way that is applicable and appropriate to the food business (e.g. a control measure required by a competent authority or validated by a competent authority or other national or international organization) or whether its performance is so well established for the application under consideration that further validation is not necessary. In either case, a food business operator must ensure that the conditions (e.g. raw materials, relevant hazards, combinations of control measures, intended use, and distribution and consumption patterns) in their particular operation do not differ from the conditions under which the control measure was previously validated.  Priority of validation Considering that food safety outcomes are often dependent on multiple control measures, prioritization of validation activities may be necessary and may take into account: o Adverse health effect: The higher the potential for an adverse health effect from a hazard, the more attention should be paid to assuring that the set of control measures selected is effective. Consideration should be given to the size of the population and the age/sex of groups most at risk. o Historical experience: For many food production and processing scenarios, there is extensive history that specific measures used to control food borne hazards are effective. If little or no experience exists with respect to the performance of a control measure in controlling a particular hazard within a specified context, it becomes more important that validation be undertaken. In certain instances, these historical data may obviate the need to conduct validations. However, it is important to avoid assuming that a food production or processing system is safe based solely on historical experience. All relevant current information should be considered when evaluating the adequacy of historical information, as it may be outdated. For example, sampling and testing procedures used to obtain the original data may be insufficient in the context of current operating procedures. New strains of microbial pathogens may now exist that do not behave in the same manner as the strains of pathogens or surrogate microorganisms used for determining early food control processes. New epidemiological and/or clinical information may indicate that the control measures used in the past were less effective than previously thought. o Other factors/constraints  Ability to monitor and verify the control measure  In prioritizing control measures for validation, consideration should be given to the amenability of the control measure to monitoring and/or verification after implementation.  Control measures that are of such a nature that it is not feasible to determine their quantitative effect on specific hazards may not always be considered priority for validation. Examples of such control measures include air locks to minimize cross contamination, hand washing procedures, and several other basic hygiene practices described in the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969).  Scientific and technical feasibility  In prioritizing control measures for validation, consideration should be given to any scientific and/or technical challenges to validating the measure. This would include consideration of the variability associated with the control measure being validated, the food being considered, and the hazards being controlled.  Resources  Validation activities may be resource intensive. Particular validation activities, such as experimental trials, process capability studies, surveys, mathematical modelling, product or environmental sampling and analytical testing, particularly when applied in an appropriate statistical fashion, require significant resources. The extent to which sufficient resources are available and such activities can be undertaken will place limits on the ability to develop and validate food safety control measures. Necessary assistance (e.g. development of guidelines for industry, training and technical assistance), particularly to small and less-developed businesses, provided by national and international organizations could help to perform validation of food safety control measures. VI. THE VALIDATION PROCESS A range of approaches to validation are available. The precise approach will depend, among other things, on the nature of the hazard, the nature of the raw ingredients and product, the type of control measures or food safety control system selected to control the hazard, and the intended stringency of control of the hazard. Approaches for validating control measures The following approaches to validation may be used individually or in combination, as appropriate. These are presented in no particular order. -- 3 of 10 -- CAC/GL 69 – 2008 4  Reference to scientific or technical literature, previous validation studies or historical knowledge of the performance of the control measure. Scientific or technical information needed to validate control measures may, in many instances, be available from many sources. These include scientific literature, government guidance, guidelines on GHP and HACCP control measures with a known history of good performance validated by compet