GUIDELINES ON THE APPLICATION OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF FOOD HYGIENE TO THE CONTROL OF PATHOGENIC VIBRIO SPECIES IN SEAFOOD CAC/GL 73-2010 INTRODUCTION 1. During the last few years, there has been an increase in reported outbreaks and cases of foodborne disease attributed to pathogenic Vibrio species. As a result, there have been several instances where the presence of pathogenic Vibrio spp. in seafood has led to a disruption in international trade. This has been particularly evident with Vibrio parahaemolyticus where there has been a series of pandemic outbreaks due to the consumption of seafood, and its emergence has been observed in regions of the world where it was previously unreported. A number of Vibrio species are increasingly being recognized as potential human pathogens. The food safety concerns associated with these microorganisms have led to the need for specific guidance on potential risk management strategies for their control. General Characteristics of Pathogenic Vibrio spp. 2. The genus Vibrio contains at least twelve species pathogenic to humans, ten of which can cause food-borne illness. The majority of food-borne illness is caused by V. parahaemolyticus, choleragenic Vibrio cholerae, or Vibrio vulnificus. V. parahaemolyticus and V. cholerae are solely or mainly isolated from gastroenteritis cases that are attributable to consumption of contaminated food (both species) or intake of contaminated water (V. cholerae). In contrast, V. vulnificus is primarily reported from extraintestinal infections (septicaemia, wounds, etc.) and primary septicaemia due to V. vulnificus infection is often associated with consumption of seafood. 3. In tropical and temperate regions, these species of Vibrio occur naturally in marine, coastal and estuarine (brackish) environments and are most abundant in estuaries. Pathogenic Vibrio spp., in particular V. cholerae, can also be recovered from freshwater reaches of estuaries, where it can also be introduced by faecal contamination. V. cholerae, unlike most other Vibrio species, can survive in freshwater environments. 4. It is now possible to differentiate environmental strains of V. cholerae and V. parahaemolyticus between virulent and avirulent strains based on their ability or inability to produce their major virulence factors. The pathogenic mechanisms of V. vulnificus have not been clearly elucidated, and its virulence appears to be multifaceted and is not well understood, and therefore all strains are considered virulent. 5. The following are important characteristics common to all Vibrio spp. Vibrio spp. are sensitive to low pH but grow well at high pH, and thus infections caused by Vibrio spp. are frequently associated with low-acid foods. In addition, the ingestion of a large number of viable cells is needed for pathogenic Vibrio spp. to survive the acidic environment of the stomach and establish an infection. Cooking of food products readily inactivates Vibrio spp. even in highly contaminated products. Hygienic practices used with all food-borne pathogens will in general control the growth of pathogenic Vibrio spp. 6. There are, however, characteristics specific to each of the three major pathogenic species of Vibrio that require attention as described below. Vibrio parahaemolyticus 7. V. parahaemolyticus is considered to be part of the autochthonous microflora in the estuarine and coastal environments in tropical to temperate zones. While V. parahaemolyticus typically is undetectable in seawater at 10°C or lower, it can be cultured from sediments throughout the year at temperatures as low as 1°C. In temperate zones, the life cycle consists of a phase of survival in winter in sediments and a phase of release with the zooplankton when the temperature of the water increases up to 14 - 19 °C. V. parahaemolyticus is characterized by its rapid growth under favourable conditions. 8. The vast majority of strains isolated from patients with diarrhoea produce a thermostable direct hemolysin (TDH). It has therefore been considered that pathogenic strains possess a tdh gene and produce TDH, and non-pathogenic strains lack the gene and the trait. Additionally, strains that produce a TDH-related hemolysin (TRH) encoded by the trh gene should also be regarded as pathogenic. Symptoms of V. parahaemolyticus infections include explosive watery diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps and, less frequently, headache, fever and chills. Most cases are self-limiting, however, severe cases of gastroenteritis requiring hospitalization have been reported. Virulent strains are seldom detected in the environment or in foods, including seafoods, while they are detected as major strains from faeces of patients. 9. V. parahaemolyticus was first identified as a foodborne pathogen in Japan in the 1950s. By the late 1960s and early 1970s V. parahaemolyticus was recognized as a cause of diarrhoeal disease worldwide. A new V. parahaemolyticus clone of O3:K6 serotype emerged in Calcutta in 1996. This clone, including its serovariants, has spread throughout Asia and to the USA, elevating the status of the spread of V. parahaemolyticus infection to pandemic. In Asia, V. parahaemolyticus is a common cause of foodborne disease. In general, the outbreaks are small in scale, involving fewer than 10 cases, but occur frequently. This pandemic V. parahaemolyticus has now spread to at least 5 continents. There is a suggestion that ballast discharge may be a major mechanism for global spread of pandemic V. parahaemolyticus, but a possibility of export/import seafood-mediated international spread cannot be ruled out. -- 1 of 14 -- 2 CAC/GL 73-2010 10. From the point of controlling seafood-borne V. parahaemolyticus illnesses, harvest is probably the most critical stage, since it is from this point onwards that individuals can actually implement measures to control V. parahaemolyticus. 11. Foods associated with illnesses due to consumption of V. parahaemolyticus include for example crayfish, lobster, shrimp, fish-balls, boiled surf clams, jack-knife clams, fried mackerel, mussel, tuna, seafood salad, raw oysters, clams, steamed/boiled crabmeat, scallops, squid, sea urchin, mysids, and sardines. These products include both raw and partially treated 1 and thoroughly treated seafood products that have been substantially recontaminated through contaminated utensils, hands, etc. Vibrio cholerae 12. V. cholerae is indigenous to fresh and brackish water environments in tropical, subtropical and temperate areas worldwide. Over 200 O serogroups have been established for V. cholerae. Strains belonging to O1 and O139 serotypes generally possess the ctx gene and produce cholera toxin (CT) and are responsible for epidemic cholera. Epidemic cholera is confined mainly to developing countries with warm climates. Cholera is exclusively a human disease and human faeces from infected individuals are the primary source of infection in cholera epidemics. Contamination of food production environments (including aquaculture ponds) by faeces can indirectly introduce choleragenic V.cholerae into foods. The concentration of free-living choleragenic V. cholerae in the natural aquatic environment is low, but V. cholerae is known to attach and multiply on zooplankton such as copepods. 13. Seven pandemics of cholera have been recorded since 1823. The first six pandemics were caused by the classical biotype strains, whereas the seventh pandemic that started in 1961 and has lasted until now, is due to V. cholerae O1 biotype El Tor strains. Epidemic cholera can be introduced from abroad by infected travellers, imported foods and through the ballast water of cargo ships. Detection frequencies of choleragenic strains of V. cholerae from legally imported foods were very low and they have seldom been implicated in cholera outbreaks. V. cholerae O139 has been responsible for the outbreaks of cholera in the Bengal area since 1992, and this bacterium has spread to other parts of the world through travellers. The choleragenic strains of V. cholerae that spread to different parts of the world may persist, and some factors may trigger an epidemic in the newly established environment. 14. Some strains belonging to the O serogroups other than O1 and O139 (referred as non-O1/non-O139) can cause food-borne diarrhoea that is milder than cholera. 15. Outbreaks of food-borne cholera have been noted quite often in the past 30 years; seafood, including bivalve molluscs, crustaceans, and finfish, are most often incriminated in food-borne cholera cases in many countries. While shrimp has historically been a concern for transmission of choleragenic V. cholerae in international trade, it has not been linked to outbreaks and it is rarely found in shrimp in international trade. Vibrio vulnificus 16. V. vulnificus can occasionally cause mild gastroenteritis in healthy individuals, but it can cause primary septicaemia in individuals with chronic pre-existing conditions, especially liver disease or alcoholism, diabetes, haemochromatosis and HIV/AIDS, following consumption of raw bivalve molluscs. This is a serious, often fatal, disease with one of the highest fatality rates of any known foodborne bacterial pathogen. The ability to acquire iron is considered essential for virulence expression of V. vulnificus, but a virulence determinant has not been established and, therefore, it is not clear whether only a particular group of the strains are virulent. The host factor (underlying chronic diseases) appears to be the primary determinant for V. vulnificus infection. Incubation period ranges from 7 hours to several days, with the average being 26 hours. The dose response for humans is not known. 17. Of the three biotypes of V. vulnificus, biotype 1 is generally considered to be responsible for most seafood-associated human infection and thus the term V. vulnificus refers to biotype 1 in this Code. 18. Foodborne illness from V. vulnificus is characterized by sporadic cases and an outbreak has never been reported. V. vulnificus has been isolated from oysters, other bivalve molluscs, and other seafood worldwide. 19. The densities of V. vulnificus are high in oysters at harvest when water temperatures exceed 20°C in areas where V. vulnificus is endemic; V. vulnificus multiplies in oysters at a temperature higher than 13°C. The salinity optimum for V. vulnificus appears to vary considerably from area to area, but highest numbers are usually found at intermediate salinities of 5 to 25 g/l (ppt: parts per thousand). Relaying oysters to high salinity waters (>32 g/l (ppt: parts per thousand) was shown to reduce V. vulnificus numbers by 3–4 logs (<10 per g) within 2 weeks. FAO/WHO Risk Assessments 20. FAO/WHO risk assessments on Vibrio vulnificus in raw oysters and choleragenic Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139 in warm water shrimp in international trade have been published (2005)2,3. Additional risk assessments on Vibrio parahaemolyticus in raw oysters, in raw and undercooked finfish and in Anadera granosa (bloody clams) have been completed4. These risk assessments constitute the basis of this Code. 1 “treated” means any vibriocidal treatment (e.g. heat treatment, high pressure.). Refer to Section 2.3 (definition for “partially treated”, 2 FAO and WHO, 2005. Risk assessment of Vibrio vulnificus in raw oysters. Microbiological Risk Assessment Series, No.8. 3 FAO and WHO, 2005. Risk assessment of choleragenic Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139 in warm-water shrimp in international trade. Microbiological Risk Assessment Series, No.9. 4 FAO and WHO, 20XX. Risk assessment of Vibrio parahaemolyticus in seafood. Microbiological Risk Assessment Series, No.XX (In press). -- 2 of 14 -- 3 CAC/GL 73-2010 SECTION I – OBJECTIVES 21. These Guidelines provide guidance on control of pathogenic Vibrio spp. in seafood, with a view towards protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in food trade. The primary purpose of these Guidelines is to highlight the key control measures that can be used to minimise the likelihood of illness arising from the presence of pathogenic Vibrio spp. in seafood. These Guidelines also provide information that will be of interest to the food industry, consumers, and other interested parties. SECTION II – SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITION 2.1 Scope 22. These Guidelines cover seafood that is marketed and may be consumed in a live, raw, chilled/frozen, partially treated, or thoroughly treated state. It is applicable to the whole food chain from primary production to final consumption. Bivalve molluscs are covered more thoroughly in the Annex, which is supplemental to these Guidelines. 23. As major causative agents of foodborne bacterial illnesses associated with seafood, the target microbiological hazards of these Guidelines are pathogenic V. parahaemolyticus, V. vulnificus and choleragenic V. cholerae. The control measures described in these Guidelines may be applicable to other pathogenic Vibrio spp. 2.2 Use of the document 24. These Guidelines are supplemental to, and should be used in conjunction with, the Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969) and the Code of Practice for Fish and Fishery Products (CAC/RCP 52-2003). The application of these Guidelines by countries may require modifications and amendments, taking into account regional differences such as the prevalence of pathogenic Vibrio spp., water temperatures and salinity. 2.3 Definition 25. For the purpose of these Guidelines, the following definitions apply: Definitions of the Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969) and the Code of Practice for Fish and Fishery Products (CAC/RCP 52-2003). Refrigeration: The lowering of product temperature to limit microbial activity. Seafood: Fish, shellfish and other aquatic invertebrates from marine and fresh water sources and their products which are intended for human consumption. Partially treated: Any treatment intended to significantly reduce or limit but not completely eliminate Vibrio spp. in seafood. As a result of partial treatment, the sensory characteristics of the raw product are lost. Clean water: means water from any source where harmful microbiological contamination, substances and/or toxic plankton are not present in such quantities that may affect the safety of fish, shellfish and their products intended for human consumption. SECTION III - PRIMARY PRODUCTION 3.1 Environmental hygiene 26. Refer to Section 3.1 of the Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969). In addition: 27. Generally, pre-harvest controls are more applicable to bivalve molluscs than to other seafood (e.g. open-sea harvested fish). Where relevant to other seafood, pre-harvest controls should be considered for areas where the likelihood of introduction of pathogenic Vibrio spp. is significant and can be controlled. 28. Temper