GUIDELINES ON PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR METHODS OF ANALYSIS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN FOOD AND FEED CXG 90-2017 Adopted in 2017. -- 1 of 13 -- CAC/GL 90-2017 2 OBJECTIVE 1. The purpose of these guidelines is to define and describe the performance criteria, which should be met by methods to analyse pesticide residues in foods and feed (hereafter referred to as food). It addresses the characteristics/parameters to provide scientifically acceptable confidence in the analytical method that is fit for the intended use and may be used to reliably evaluate pesticide residues for either domestic monitoring and/or international trade. 2. This document is applicable to both single residue methods and multi-residue methods (MRMs) that analyse target compounds in all food commodities per the residue definition. 3. These guidelines cover qualitative and quantitative analyses, each having their own method performance criteria. Performance criteria of methods for analyte identification and confirmation are also addressed. PRINCIPLES FOR THE SELECTION AND VALIDATION OF METHODS A. Defining the Purpose of the Method and Scope 4. The intended purpose of the method is usually described in a statement of scope, which defines the analytes (residues), the matrices, and the concentration ranges. It also states whether the method is intended for screening, quantification, identification, and/or confirmation of results. 5. In regulatory applications, the maximum residue limit (MRL) is expressed in terms of the residue definition. Residue analytical methods should be able to measure all components of the residue definition. 6. Fitness-for-purpose is the extent to which the performance of a method meets the end-user’s needs, and matches the criteria (data quality objectives) agreed between the laboratory and the end-user (or client) of the data, within technical and resource constraints. Fitness-for-purpose criteria could be based on some of the characteristics described in this document, but ultimately will be expressed in terms of acceptable combined uncertainty1. 7. Selection of methods is based on analytes and the intended purpose of the analyses2. B. Supplementing other Codex Alimentarius Commission Guidelines 8. The Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) has issued a guideline3 for laboratories involved in the testing of foods for import/export which recommends that such laboratories should: (a) use internal quality control procedures, such as those described in the “Harmonized Guidelines for Internal Quality Control in Analytical Chemistry Laboratories;” (b) participate in appropriate proficiency testing schemes for food analysis which conform to the requirement laid out in “The International Harmonized Protocol for Proficiency Testing of (Chemical) Analytical Laboratories (Pure Appl. Chem., vol 78, No. 1, pp.145-186, 2006);” and (c) whenever available, use methods which have been validated according to principles provided by the CAC. 9. The analytical methods should be used within the internationally accepted, approved, and recognized laboratory Quality Management System4 to be consistent with the principles in the document for quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) referenced above. C. Method Validation 10. The process of method validation is intended to demonstrate that a method is fit-for-purpose. This means that when a test is performed by a properly trained analyst using the specified equipment and materials and exactly following the method protocol, accurate, reliable, and consistent results can be obtained within specified statistical limits for sample analysis. The validation should demonstrate the identity and concentration of the analyte, taking into account for matrix effects, provide a statistical characterization of recovery results, and indicate if the frequency of false positives and negatives are acceptable. When the method is followed using suitable analytical standards, results within the established performance criteria should be obtained on the same or equivalent sample material by a trained analyst in any experienced residue testing laboratory. To ensure method performance remains appropriate over time, method validation should be continuously assessed (e.g. recovery spikes). 1 Harmonized IUPAC Guidelines For Single-Laboratory Validation of Methods of Analysis, Pure & Appl. Chem., 74(5), 2002; 835 – 855 2 OECD Guidance Document on Pesticide Residue Analytical Methods, ENV/JM/MONO (2007)17 3 Guidelines for the Assessment of the Competence of Testing Laboratories Involved in the Import and Export Control of Food (CXG 27-1997) 4 General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories, ISO/IEC 17025 (2005). -- 2 of 13 -- CAC/GL 90-2017 3 PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS FOR ANALYTICAL METHODS 11. The general requirements for the individual performance criteria of a method are summarized below1,5 A. Method Documentation 12. After validation, the method documentation should provide, in addition to performance criteria (data quality objectives), the following information: (a) Identity of the analytes included in the residue definition. (b) Concentration range covered by the validation; (c) Matrices used in the validation (representative commodity categories, e.g., similar agricultural products based on characteristics including moisture, fat, and sugar content, pH); (d) Protocol describing the equipment, reagents, detailed step-by-step procedure including permissible variations (e.g. “heat at 100 ± 5 °C for 30 ± 5 min”), calibration and quality procedures, special safety precautions required, and intended application and critical uncertainty requirements; (e) quantitative result of the expanded measurement uncertainty (MU) for the method should be calculated in the validation procedure and reported, if required. B. Selectivity 13. Ideally, selectivity should be evaluated to demonstrate that no interferences occur which significantly affect the analysis. It is impractical to test the method against every potential interferant, but it is required that common interferences are checked by analysing a reagent (process) blank for every batch of reagents. When reagents and/or solvents are changed between batches of samples, additional reagent blank evaluations could be performed. Background levels of plasticizers, septa bleed, cleaning agents, reagent impurities, laboratory contamination, carry-over, etc. tend to show up in reagent blanks and must be recognized by the analyst when they occur. Also, analyte-to-analyte interferences must be known by checking individual analytes in mixed standard solutions. Matrix interferences are evaluated by analyses of samples known to be free of the analytes and a matrix blank is required with each batch of samples or a standard addition approach to quantification is adopted (see Section E). 14. As a general principle, selectivity should be such that interferences have no impact on method performance. The ultimate test of selectivity involves the rates of false positives and negatives in the analyses. To estimate rates of false positives and negatives during method validation, an adequate number of blanks per matrix [not from the same source] should be analysed along with spiked matrices at the analyte reporting level. C. Calibration 15. With the exception of errors in preparation of calibration materials, calibration errors are usually a minor component of the total uncertainty, and can be safely assigned into other categories. For example, random errors resulting from calibration are part of the uncertainty, while systematic errors cause analytical bias, both of which are assessed as a whole during validation and on-going quality control. Nevertheless, there are some characteristics of calibration that are useful to know at the outset of method validation because they affect optimization of the final protocol. For example, it must be known in advance whether the calibration curve is linear or quadratic, passes through the origin, and is affected by the sample matrix or not. The described guidelines in this document relate more to validation, which may be more detailed than the calibration undertaken during routine analysis. 16. Replicate measurements are needed to provide an empirical estimate of uncertainty. The following calibration procedures are recommended for the initial method validation: (a) determinations at five or more concentrations should be performed (consider multiple injections per concentration); (b) the reference standards should be evenly spaced over the concentration range of interest and the calibration range should encompass the entire concentration range likely to be encountered; 5 OECD Guidance Document for Single Laboratory Validation of Quantitative Analytical Method-Guidance used in support of pre-and post-registration data requirements for plant protection and biocidal products ENV/JM/MONO(2014)20 -- 3 of 13 -- CAC/GL 90-2017 4 (c) the reference standards should be dispersed over the whole sequence, or encompass the beginning and end of the run to demonstrate that calibration integrity is maintained over the entire sequence; and the fit of the calibration function must be plotted and inspected visually and/or by calculation of the residuals (differences between the actual and calculated concentrations of the standards), avoiding over-reliance on correlation coefficients. If residuals of the calibration curve deviate by more than ±20 – 30 % (30% for calibration concentrations near the instrument LOQ), statistical consideration of outliers should be made, possibly leading to re-analysis of the sequence if quality control criteria are not met. D. Linearity 17. Linearity can be tested by examination of a plot of residuals produced by linear regression of the responses on the concentrations in an appropriate calibration set. Any curved pattern suggests a lack of fit due to a nonlinear calibration function. If this is the case, another function such as quadratic should be tested and applied, using at least five concentration levels. Despite its current widespread use as an indication of quality of fit, the coefficient of determination (R2) may be misleading because it places greater significance on standards with higher concentrations. In this case, an appropriate weighting factor such as 1/x or 1/x2 should be considered to minimize the potential impact of the relative concentration range 18. In general, the use of weighted-linear regression or weighted-quadratic function is recommended rather than linear regression for low part per billion (μg/kg) concentration determinations. Ideally, the value of the intercept should be close to zero to reduce errors in calculating residue concentrations at low levels, although the calibration curve should not be forced through the origin without justification E. Matrix Effects 19. Matrix-matched calibration is commonly used to compensate for matrix effects. Extracts of blank matrix, preferably of the same or similar type as the sample, should be used for calibration. An alternative practical approach to compensate for matrix effects in gas chromatographic (GC) analyses is the use of chemical components (analyte protectants) that are added to both the sample extracts and the calibration solutions in order to (ideally) maximize equally the response of pesticides in calibrants in solvent and sample extracts. Alternative ways to compensate for matrix effects involve the use of standard addition, isotopically labeled internal standards (IS), or chemical analogues. However, these approaches are often difficult in MRMs because there are too many residues in different matrices at different levels to devise routine procedures, and the lack of isotopically-labelled standards for so many analytes. Ideally, if isotopically labelled standards are available, such standards should represent the range of target compounds and recoveries should fall within the criteria for samples spiked with non-isotopically labelled standards. If solvent-only calibration is used, a measurement of matrix effects must be made to demonstrate equivalence of results by comparing responses of matrix-matched with solvent-only standards. F. Trueness and Recovery 20. Trueness is the closeness of agreement between a test result and the accepted reference value of the property being measured. Trueness is stated quantitatively in terms of “bias,” with smaller bias indicating greater trueness. Bias is typically determined by comparing the response of the method to a certified (if available) reference material with a known value assigned to the material. Multi-laboratory testing is recommended ideally. Where the uncertainty in the reference value is not negligible, evaluation of the results should consider the reference material uncertainty as well as the statistical variability from analysing the reference material. In the absence of certified reference materials1,5 guidelines recommend use of an available reference material that is well characterized for the purpose of the validation study. 21. Recovery refers to the proportion of analyte determined in the final result compared with the amount added (usually to a blank) sample prior to extraction, generally expressed as a percentage. Errors in measurement will lead to biased recovery figures that will deviate from the actual recovery in the final extract. Routine recovery refers to the determination(s) performed in quality control spikes in the analysis of each batch of samples. G. Precision 22. Precision is the closeness of agreement between independent (replicate) test results obtained under stipulated conditions. It is usually specified in terms of standard deviation (SD) or relative standard deviation (RSD), also known as coefficient of variation (CV). The distinction between precision and bias depends on the level at which the analytical system is viewed. Thus, from the viewpoint of a single determination, any deviation affecting the calibration used in the analysis would be seen as a bias. From the point of view of the analyst reviewing a year’s work, the analytical bias will be different every day and should act like a random variable with an associated precision, incorporating any stipulated conditions for the estimation of this precision. -- 4 of 13 -- CAC/GL 90-2017 5 23. For single-laboratory validation, two types of precision sets of conditions are relevant: (a) repeatability, the variability of measurements within the same analytical sequence, and (b) within-laboratory reproducibility, the variability of results among multiple sets of the same sample. It is important that the precision values are representative of likely test conditions. First of all, the variation in conditions among the runs should represent what would normally happen in the laboratory during routine use of the method. This can be done by on-going method performance validation/verification. For instan