-1- Adopted in 2003, Annexes II and III adopted in 2008. GUIDELINE FOR THE CONDUCT OF FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF FOODS DERIVED FROM RECOMBINANT-DNA PLANTS CAC/GL 45-2003 SECTION 1 - SCOPE 1. This Guideline supports the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology. It addresses safety and nutritional aspects of foods consisting of, or derived from, plants that have a history of safe use as sources of food, and that have been modified by modern biotechnology to exhibit new or altered expression of traits. 2. This document does not address animal feed or animals fed with the feed. This document also does not address environmental risks. 3. The Codex principles of risk analysis, particularly those for risk assessment, are primarily intended to apply to discrete chemical entities such as food additives and pesticide residues, or a specific chemical or microbial contaminant that have identifiable hazards and risks; they are not intended to apply to whole foods as such. Indeed, few foods have been assessed scientifically in a manner that would fully characterise all risks associated with the food. Further, many foods contain substances that would likely be found harmful if subjected to conventional approaches to safety testing. Thus, a more focused approach is required where the safety of a whole food is being considered. 4. This approach is based on the principle that the safety of foods derived from new plant varieties, including recombinant-DNA plants, is assessed relative to the conventional counterpart having a history of safe use, taking into account both intended and unintended effects. Rather than trying to identify every hazard associated with a particular food, the intention is to identify new or altered hazards relative to the conventional counterpart. 5. This safety assessment approach falls within the risk assessment framework as discussed in Section 3 of the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology. If a new or altered hazard, nutritional or other food safety concern is identified by the safety assessment, the risk associated with it would first be assessed to determine its relevance to human health. Following the safety assessment and if necessary further risk assessment, the food would be subjected to risk management considerations in accordance with the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology before it is considered for commercial distribution. 6. Risk management measures such as post-market monitoring of consumer health effects may assist the risk assessment process. These are discussed in paragraph 20 of the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods derived from Modern Biotechnology. 7. The Guideline describes the recommended approach to making safety assessments of foods derived from recombinant-DNA plants where a conventional counterpart exists, and identifies the data and information that are generally applicable to making such assessments. While this Guideline is designed for foods derived from recombinant- DNA plants, the approach described could, in general, be applied to foods derived from plants that have been altered by other techniques. SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS 8. The definitions below apply to this Guideline: “Recombinant-DNA Plant” - means a plant in which the genetic material has been changed through in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles. “Conventional Counterpart” - means a related plant variety, its components and/or products for which there is experience of establishing safety based on common use as food1. 1 It is recognized that for the foreseeable future, foods derived from modern biotechnology will not be used as conventional counterparts. -- 1 of 18 -- -2- SECTION 3 - INTRODUCTION TO FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT 9. Traditionally, new varieties of food plants have not been systematically subjected to extensive chemical, toxicological, or nutritional evaluation prior to marketing, with the exception of foods for specific groups, such as infants, where the food may constitute a substantial portion of the diet. Thus, new varieties of corn, soya, potatoes and other common food plants are evaluated by breeders for agronomic and phenotypic characteristics, but generally, foods derived from such new plant varieties are not subjected to the rigorous and extensive food safety testing procedures, including studies in animals, that are typical of chemicals such as food additives or pesticide residues that may be present in food. 10. The use of animal models for assessing toxicological endpoints is a major element in the risk assessment of many compounds such as pesticides. In most cases, however, the substance to be tested is well characterised, of known purity, of no particular nutritional value, and, human exposure to it is generally low. It is therefore relatively straightforward to feed such compounds to animals at a range of doses some several orders of magnitude greater than the expected human exposure levels, in order to identify any potential adverse health effects of importance to humans. In this way, it is possible, in most cases, to estimate levels of exposure at which adverse effects are not observed and to set safe intake levels by the application of appropriate safety factors. 11. Animal studies cannot readily be applied to testing the risks associated with whole foods, which are complex mixtures of compounds, often characterised by a wide variation in composition and nutritional value. Due to their bulk and effect on satiety, they can usually only be fed to animals at low multiples of the amounts that might be present in the human diet. In addition, a key factor to consider in conducting animal studies on foods is the nutritional value and balance of the diets used, in order to avoid the induction of adverse effects which are not related directly to the material itself. Detecting any potential adverse effects and relating these conclusively to an individual characteristic of the food can therefore be extremely difficult. If the characterization of the food indicates that the available data are insufficient for a thorough safety assessment, properly designed animal studies could be requested on the whole foods. Another consideration in deciding the need for animal studies is whether it is appropriate to subject experimental animals to such a study if it is unlikely to give rise to meaningful information. 12. Due to the difficulties of applying traditional toxicological testing and risk assessment procedures to whole foods, a more focused approach is required for the safety assessment of foods derived from food plants, including recombinant- DNA plants. This has been addressed by the development of a multidisciplinary approach for assessing safety which takes into account both intended and unintended changes that may occur in the plant or in the foods derived from it, using the concept of substantial equivalence. 13. The concept of substantial equivalence is a key step in the safety assessment process. However, it is not a safety assessment in itself; rather it represents the starting point which is used to structure the safety assessment of a new food relative to its conventional counterpart. This concept is used to identify similarities and differences between the new food and its conventional counterpart 2 . It aids in the identification of potential safety and nutritional issues and is considered the most appropriate strategy to date for safety assessment of foods derived from recombinant-DNA plants. The safety assessment carried out in this way does not imply absolute safety of the new product; rather, it focuses on assessing the safety of any identified differences so that the safety of the new product can be considered relative to its conventional counterpart. UNINTENDED EFFECTS 14. In achieving the objective of conferring a specific target trait (intended effect) to a plant by the insertion of defined DNA sequences, additional traits could, in some cases, be acquired or existing traits could be lost or modified (unintended effects). The potential occurrence of unintended effects is not restricted to the use of in vitro nucleic acid techniques. Rather, it is an inherent and general phenomenon that can also occur in conventional breeding. Unintended effects may be deleterious, beneficial, or neutral with respect to the health of the plant or the safety of foods derived from the plant. Unintended effects in recombinant-DNA plants may also arise through the insertion of DNA sequences and/or they may arise through subsequent conventional breeding of the recombinant-DNA plant. Safety assessment should include data and information to reduce the possibility that a food derived from a recombinant-DNA plant would have an unexpected, adverse effect on human health. 15. Unintended effects can result from the random insertion of DNA sequences into the plant genome which may cause disruption or silencing of existing genes, activation of silent genes, or modifications in the expression of existing genes. Unintended effects may also result in the formation of new or changed patterns of metabolites. For example, the expression of enzymes at high levels may give rise to secondary biochemical effects or changes in the regulation of metabolic pathways and/or altered levels of metabolites. 2 The concept of substantial equivalence as described in the report of the 2000 joint FAO /WHO expert consultations (Document WHO/SDE/PHE/FOS/00.6, WHO, Geneva, 2000). -- 2 of 18 -- -3- 16. Unintended effects due to genetic modification may be subdivided into two groups: those that are "predictable" and those that are “unexpected”. Many unintended effects are largely predictable based on knowledge of the inserted trait and its metabolic connections or of the site of insertion. Due to the expanding information on plant genome and the increased specificity in terms of genetic materials introduced through recombinant-DNA techniques compared with other forms of plant breeding, it may become easier to predict unintended effects of a particular modification. Molecular biological and biochemical techniques can also be used to analyse potential changes at the level of gene transcription and message translation that could lead to unintended effects. 17. The safety assessment of foods derived from recombinant-DNA plants involves methods to identify and detect such unintended effects and procedures to evaluate their biological relevance and potential impact on food safety. A variety of data and information are necessary to assess unintended effects because no individual test can detect all possible unintended effects or identify, with certainty, those relevant to human health. These data and information, when considered in total, provide assurance that the food is unlikely to have an adverse effect on human health. The assessment for unintended effects takes into account the agronomic/phenotypic characteristics of the plant that are typically observed by breeders in selecting new varieties for commercialization. These observations by breeders provide a first screen for plants that exhibit unintended traits. New varieties that pass this screen are subjected to safety assessment as described in Sections 4 and 5. F RAMEWORK OF F OOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT 18. The safety assessment of a food derived from a recombinant-DNA plant follows a stepwise process of addressing relevant factors that include: A) Description of the recombinant-DNA plant; B) Description of the host plant and its use as food; C) Description of the donor organism(s); D) Description of the genetic modification(s); E) Characterization of the genetic modification(s); F) Safety assessment: a) expressed substances (non-nucleic acid substances); b) compositional analyses of key components; c) evaluation of metabolites ; d) food processing; e) nutritional modification; and G) Other considerations. 19. In certain cases, the characteristics of the product may necessitate development of additional data and information to address issues that are unique to the product under review. 20. Experiments intended to develop data for safety assessments should be designed and conducted in accordance with sound scientific concepts and principles, as well as, where appropriate, Good Laboratory Practice. Primary data should be made available to regulatory authorities at request. Data should be obtained using sound scientific methods and analysed using appropriate statistical techniques. The sensitivity of all analytical methods should be documented. 21. The goal of each safety assessment is to provide assurance, in the light of the best available scientific knowledge, that the food does not cause harm when prepared, used and/or eaten according to its intended use. The expected endpoint of such an assessment will be a conclusion regarding whether the new food is as safe as the conventional counterpart taking into account dietary impact of any changes in nutritional content or value. In essence, therefore, the outcome of the safety assessment process is to define the product under consideration in such a way as to enable risk managers to determine whether any measures are needed and if so to make well-informed and appropriate decisions. SECTION 4 - GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS DESCRIPTION OF THE RECOMBINANT -DNA PLANT 22. A description of the recombinant-DNA plant being presented for safety assessment should be provided. This description should identify the crop, the transformation event(s) to be reviewed and the type and purpose of the modification. This description should be sufficient to aid in understanding the nature of the food being submitted for safety assessment. -- 3 of 18 -- -4- DESCRIPTION OF THE HOST P LANT AND ITS USE AS F OOD 23. A comprehensive description of the host plant should be provided. The necessary data and information should include, but need not be restricted to: A) common or usual name; scientific name; and, taxonomic classification; B) history of cultivation and development through breeding, in particular identifying traits that may adversely impact on human health ; C) information on the host plant’s genotype and phenotype relevant to its safety, including any known toxicity or allergenicity; and D) history of safe use for consumption as food. 24. Relevant phenotypic information should be provided not only for the host plant, but also for related species and for plants that have made or may make a significant contribution to the genetic background of the host plant. 25. The history of use may include information on how the plant is typically cultivated, transported and stored, whether special processing is required to make the plant safe to eat, and the plant’s normal role in the diet (e.g. which part of the plant is used as a food source, whether its consumpti