CAC/GL 59-2006 Page 1 of 16 Amendment 2011. GUIDELINES ON ESTIMATION OF UNCERTAINTY OF RESULTS (CAC/GL 59-2006) 1. INTRODUCTION It is a requirement under ISO/IEC 17025 that laboratories determine and make available the uncertainty associated with analytical results. To this end, food testing laboratories operating under Guidelines on Good Laboratory Practice in Pesticide Residue Analysis (CAC/GL 40-1993) should have available sufficient data derived from method validation/verification, inter-laboratory studies and in-house quality control activities, which can be applied to estimate the uncertainties particularly for the routine methods undertaken in the laboratory. These guidelines were prepared taking into account the general recommendations of the Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling (CCMAS). 1.1 CONCEPT AND COMPONENTS OF UNCERTAINTY Measurement uncertainty refers to the ‘uncertainty’ associated with data generated by a measurement process. In analytical chemistry, it generally defines the uncertainty associated with the laboratory process but may also include an uncertainty component associated with sampling. The uncertainty ‘estimate’ therefore describes the range around a reported or experimental result within which the true value can be expected to lie within a defined level of probability. This is a different concept to measurement error which can be defined as the difference between an individual result and the true value. The reporting of uncertainty is intended to provide a higher level of confidence in the validity of the reported result. Contributions to data uncertainty are manifold and described in detail in Tables 1and 2. The evaluation of uncertainty ideally requires an understanding and estimation of the contributions to the uncertainty of each of the activities involved in the measurement process. 2. IDENTIFICATION OF UNCERTAINTY SOURCES In general, the uncertainty of measurements is comprised of many components, arising from activities involved with the sample. The uncertainty of an analytical result is influenced by three major phases of the determination: ¾ External operations: sampling (SS), packing, shipping and storage of samples 1 ; ¾ Preparation of test portion: sub-sampling, sample preparation and sample processing (SSp ); ¾ Analysis (S A): extraction, cleanup, evaporation, derivatisation, instrumental determination2 . The combined standard (S Res ) and relative (CVRes ) uncertainty may be calculated according to the error propagation law: ) ( 2 2 2 Re S S S S A Sp S s + + = ; S S S L S s 2 2 Re + = (1) If the whole sample is analysed, the mean residue remains the same and the equation can be written as: CV CV CV L S s 2 2 Re + = and CVL = 2 2 A Sp CV CV + (2) Where CV L is the relative uncertainty of the laboratory phase of the determination which may derive from the sub-sampling, sample preparation, sample processing and analytical steps. 1 Packing, shipping, storage, and laboratory preparation of samples may have significant influence on the residues detected, but their contribution to the uncertainty can often not be quantified based on the current information. Examples of such errors are e.g, selection of sampling position, time of sampling, Incorrect labelling decomposition of analytes or contamination of the sample. 2 If the result has been corrected for the recovery, the uncertainty associated with this correction shall be incorporated. -- 1 of 16 -- CAC/GL 59-2006 Page 2 of 16 It should be noted that a laboratory is normally only required to estimate the uncertainty associated with those processes for which it has control, that is, only those processes that take place in the laboratory if sampling is not the responsibility of the laboratory staff. 2.1 ERRORS IN ANALYTICAL M EASUREMENTS In most measurements we can distinguish between three types of errors: gross, random and systematic errors. Gross errors refer to unintentional/unpredictable errors while generating the analytical result. Errors of this type invalidate the measurement. Laboratory quality assurance procedures should minimize gross errors. It is not possible or desirable to statistically evaluate and include the gross errors in the estimation of uncertainty. They need no further discussion in this document. Random errors are present in all measurements, and cause replicate results to fall on either side of the mean value. The random error of a measurement cannot be compensated for, but increasing the number of observations and training of the analyst may reduce the effects. Systematic errors occur in most experiments, but their effects are quite different. The sum of all the systematic errors in an experiment is referred to as the bias. Since they do not sum to zero over a large number of measurements, individual systematic errors cannot be detected directly by replicate analyses. The problem with systematic errors is that they may go undetected unless appropriate precautions are taken. In practice, systematic errors in an analysis can only be identified if the analytical technique is applied to a reference material, the sample is analysed by another analyst or preferably in another laboratory, or by re- analysing the sample by another analytical method. However, only if the reference material matches identically in terms of analyte, matrix, and concentration does it meet the ideal conditions for determining the bias of the method. The bias of a method may also be investigated by recovery studies. However, recovery studies assess only the effects of analysis (S A) and do not necessarily apply to naturally incurred samples, or components of the bias that may be introduced prior to the analytical step. In pesticide analysis, results are not normally corrected for the recovery, but should be corrected if the average recovery is significantly different from 100%. If the result has been corrected for recovery, the uncertainty associated with recovery should be incorporated in the uncertainty estimation of the measurement. Some examples of sources of errors are illustrated in Tables 1 and 2. It should be noted that not all sources mentioned have to be evaluated in the uncertainty estimation. Some sources are already incorporated in the overall uncertainty, while others are negligible and may be disregarded. However, it is important to recognise and assess all sources before elimination. Further information may be obtained from published documents 3,4 . Table 1: Sources of error in preparation of the test portion Sources of systematic error Sources of random error The analytical sample is in contact and contaminated by other portions of the sample. Sample preparation The portion of sample to be analysed (analytical sample) may be incorrectly selected. Rinsing, brushing is performed to various extent, stalks and stones may be differentially removed. 3 EURACHEM Guide to Quantifying Uncertainty in Analytical Measurements, 2 nd ed. 1999, http://www.measurementuncertainty.org. 4 Ambrus A. Reliability of residue data, Accred. Qual. Assur. 9, pp. 288-304. 2004. -- 2 of 16 -- CAC/GL 59-2006 Page 3 of 16 Sources of systematic error Sources of random error Non homogeneity of the analyte in single units of the analytical sample. Non homogeneity of the analyte in the ground/chopped analytical sample. Variation of temperature during the homogenisation process. Sample processing (S Sp ) Decomposition of analyte during sample processing, cross contamination of the samples. Texture (maturity) of plant materials affecting the efficiency of homogenisation process. Table 2: Sources of error in analysis (S A): Sources of systematic error Sources of random error Incomplete recovery of analyte. Variation in the composition (e.g. water, fat, and sugar content) of sample materials taken from a commodity. Extraction / Cleanup Interference of co-extracted materials (load of the adsorbent). Temperature and composition of sample/solvent matrix. Interference of co-extracted compounds. Variation of nominal volume of devices within the permitted tolerance intervals. incorrect purity of analytical standard. Precision and linearity of balances. Biased weight/volume measurements. Incomplete and variable derivatisation reactions. Operator bias in reading analogue instruments, equipment. Changing of laboratory-environmental conditions during analysis. Determination of substance which do not originate from the sample (e.g. contamination from the packing material). Varying injection, chromatographic and detection conditions (matrix effect, system inertness, detector response, signal to noise variation etc.). Determination of substance differing from the residue definition. Operator effects (lack of attention). Quantitative determination Biased calibration. Calibration. 3. PROCEDURES FOR ESTIMATING MEASUREMENT UNCERTAINTY Whilst there are a number of options available to laboratories for the estimation of measurement uncertainty, there are two procedures described as the ‘bottom up’ approach and the ‘top down’ approach 1 that are the most commonly used. -- 3 of 16 -- CAC/GL 59-2006 Page 4 of 16 The bottom-up method: The bottom up or component-by-component approach incorporates an activity-based process whereby the analyst breaks down all the analytical operations into primary activities. These are then combined or grouped into common activities and an estimate made of the contribution of these activities to the combined uncertainty value of the measurement process. The bottom up approach can be very laborious and requires a detailed knowledge of the whole analytical process. The benefit to the analyst is that this approach provides a clear understanding of the analytical activities which contribute significantly to the measurement uncertainty and which therefore may be assigned as critical control points to reduce or manage measurement uncertainty in future applications of the method. The top-down method: The top down approach is based on method validation and long-term precision data derived from laboratory control samples, proficiency testing results, published literature data and/or inter-laboratory collaborative trials. Uncertainty estimates based on inter-laboratory studies may also take into account the between- laboratory variability of the data and provides a reliable estimate of the method performance and the uncertainty associated with its application. It is important to acknowledge however that collaborative studies are designed to evaluate the performance of a specific method and participating laboratories. They normally do not evaluate imprecision due to sample preparation or processing as the samples generally tend to be highly homogenized. Pesticide residue analytical laboratories normally look for over 200 residues in numerous commodities that lead to practically infinite number of combinations. Therefore, it is suggested that, for estimating the uncertainty associated with multi residue procedures, laboratories use a properly selected range of analytes and sample matrices which represents the residues and commodities to be analysed in terms of physical chemical properties and composition according to the relevant parts of the Guidelines on Good Laboratory Practice in Pesticide Residue Analysis rather than establishing the uncertainty for each method/analyte/ matrix combination. The selection of a representative range of analytes and matrices to provide an uncertainty estimate should be supported by validation data and studies on the selected matrix/analyte combination. In summary, laboratories should use either their own long-term precision data or the activity-based procedure (component by component calculation) to establish and refine the uncertainty data. In certain situations it may also be appropriate to estimate the uncertainty contribution due to sample variability. This will require an understanding of the analyte variability within the sample lot and is not readily available to the laboratory or the analyst. The values obtained from the statistical analysis of over 8500 residue data (Table 4) provide currently the best estimate5 . These estimates can be incorporated into the combined uncertainty value. Likewise, it may be necessary to take into consideration the stability of analytes during sample storage and processing if these are likely to result in analyte variability between analysts and laboratories. 3.1 UNCERTAINTY E STIMATES OF RESULTS INVOLVING ANALYSIS OF M ULTI-COMPONENTS The estimation of uncertainty of results for multi-component residues arising from the application of technical mixtures including structural and optical isomers, metabolites and other breakdown products may require a different approach particularly where the MRL has been established for the sum of all or some of the component residues. The assessment of the random and systematic errors of the results based on the measurements of multiple peaks is explained in detail in a recent publication6 . 5 Ambrus A and Soboleva E. Contribution of sampling to the variability of residue data, JAOAC. 87, 1368-1379, 2004. 6 Soboleva E., Ambrus A., Jarju O., Estimation of uncertainty of analytical results based on multiple peaks, J. Chromatogr. A. 1029. 2004, 161-166. -- 4 of 16 -- CAC/GL 59-2006 Page 5 of 16 4. GUIDANCE VALUES FOR ACCEPTABLE UNCERTAINTIES The establishment of the standard deviation of a series of tests ran by a single laboratory, as a measure of standard uncertainty, requires the results a large data-set that is not always available. However, for smaller amounts of data the true standard deviation can be estimated as follows: Depending on the number of observations (n), the relation of the true (σ) standard deviations, calculated (S) standard deviations, and the expected range of the mean value ( x ) at 95% probability are illustrated in Table 3. The multiplying factor, f, provides the link between the estimated and true values as the function of the number of measurements. Table 3 The values of f for calculation of expected ranges of standard deviation and mean values N S min = f1σ S max = f2σ x = ± f3 S f1 f2 f3 5 0.35 1.67 1.24 7 0.45 1.55 0.92 15 0.63 1.37 0.55 31 0.75 1.25 0.37 61 0.82 1.18 0.26 121 0.87 1.13 0.18 For instance: the repeatability of the laboratory operations, CVL, was determined from 5 test portions drawn from a homogenised sample containing incurred residues. The average residue found was 0.75 mg/kg with a standard deviation of 0.2 mg/kg. The true residue of the processed sample can be expected between 0.75 ± 1.24*0.2 = 0.75 ± 0.248 mg/kg, while the true uncertainty of the measurement results is likely to be between 0.0696 (0.2*0.35) and 0.334 (0.2*1.67) mg/kg in 95% of the cases. The guidance values for standard uncertainty, given in Table 4, are based on a large number of data and can be used to assess the reality of the estimated uncertainty in a laboratory in order to avoid an unreasonable high or low value. Ta