24 Adopted 1997. Revision 2010. GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGN, OPERATION, ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION OF FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS CAC/GL 26-1997 SECTION 1 – OBJECTIVES 1. These guidelines provide a framework for the development of import and export inspection and certification systems consistent with the Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification.1 They are intended to assist countries2 in the application of requirements and the determination of equivalency, thereby protecting consumers and facilitating trade in foodstuffs.3 2. The document deals with the recognition of equivalence of inspection and/or certification systems and not with standards related to specific food products or their components (e.g., food hygiene, additives and contaminants, labelling and quality requirements). 3. Application by governments of the guidelines presented in this document should help build and maintain the necessary confidence in the inspection and certification system of an exporting country and facilitate fair trade, taking account of the expectations of consumers for an appropriate level of protection. SECTION 2 – DEFINITIONS Audit is a systematic and functionally independent examination to determine whether activities and related results comply with planned objectives.4 Certification is the procedure by which official certification bodies and officially recognized bodies provide written or equivalent assurance that foods or food control systems conform to requirements. Certification of food may be, as appropriate, based on a range of inspection activities which may include continuous on-line 1 CAC/GL 20-1995. 2 For the purpose of these guidelines, “countries” includes regional economic integration organizations to which a group of countries have transferred competences as regards food import and export inspection and certification systems and/or the negotiation of equivalency agreements with other countries. 3 The Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CAC/GL 20-1995) includes that in the design and application of food inspection and certification systems, importing countries should take into account the capabilities of developing countries to provide the necessary safeguards (Paragraph 18). 4 Consistent with the Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CAC/GL 20-1995). -- 1 of 25 -- GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGN, OPERATION, ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION OF FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (CAC/GL 26-1997) 25 inspection, auditing of quality assurance systems, and examination of finished products.4 Equivalence is the capability of different inspection and certification systems to meet the same objectives. Inspection is the examination of food or systems for control of food, raw materials, processing and distribution, including in-process and finished product testing, in order to verify that they conform to requirements.4 Official accreditation is the procedure by which a government agency having jurisdiction formally recognizes the competence of an inspection and/or certification body to provide inspection and certification services. Official inspection systems and official certification systems are systems administered by a government agency having jurisdiction empowered to perform a regulatory or enforcement function or both.4 Officially recognized inspection systems and officially recognized certification systems are systems which have been formally approved or recognized by a government agency having jurisdiction.4 Requirements are the criteria set down by the competent authorities relating to trade in foodstuffs covering the protection of public health, the protection of consumers and conditions of fair trading.4 Risk analysis is a process consisting of three components: risk assessment, risk management and risk communication.5 Risk assessment is a scientifically based process consisting of the following steps: (i) hazard identification, (ii) hazard characterization, (iii) exposure assessment and (iv) risk characterization.5 Risk management is the process of weighing policy alternatives in the light of the results of risk assessment and, if required, selecting and implementing appropriate control options, including regulatory measures.5 Risk communication is the interactive exchange of information and opinions concerning risk among risk assessors, risk managers, consumers and other interested parties.5 5 Codex Alimentarius Procedural Manual. -- 2 of 25 -- FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (5th Edition) 26 SECTION 3 – RISK ANALYSIS 4. Consistent and transparent application of risk analysis will facilitate international trade by increasing confidence in the food safety and in the inspection systems of trading partners. It will also enable inspection resources to be targeted effectively on hazards to public health arising at any stage of the food production and distribution chain. 5. The principles of Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) developed by the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene6 provide a systematic basis for the identification and control of hazards so as to ensure the safety of food. The use of a HACCP approach by food businesses should be recognized by governments as a fundamental tool for improving the safety of foodstuffs. SECTION 4 – QUALITY ASSURANCE 6. The voluntary utilization of quality assurance by food businesses should also be encouraged in order to achieve greater confidence in the quality of products obtained. If safety and/or quality assurance tools are used by food businesses, the official inspection and certification systems should take them into account in particular through the adaptation of their control methodologies. 7. Governments do, however, retain the fundamental responsibility to ensure by official inspection and certification7 the conformity of foodstuffs to requirements. 8. The degree to which industry effectively utilizes quality assurance procedures can influence the methods and procedures by which government services verify that requirements have been met, where official authorities consider such procedures to be relevant to their requirements. SECTION 5 – EQUIVALENCE 9. The recognition of equivalence of inspection and certification should be facilitated where it can be objectively demonstrated that there is an appropriate system for inspection and certification of food by the exporting country in accordance with these guidelines. 6 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application, Annex to the Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969). 7 For the purpose of these guidelines, “inspection and certification” means “inspection and/or certification”. -- 3 of 25 -- GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGN, OPERATION, ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION OF FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (CAC/GL 26-1997) 27 10. For the determination of equivalence, governments should recognize that: – inspection and certification systems should be organized for the risk involved, considering that the same food commodities produced in different countries may present different hazards; and, – control methodologies can be different but achieve equivalent results. For example, environmental sampling and the strict application of good agricultural practices, with limited end product testing for verification purposes, may produce a result equivalent to extensive end product testing for the control of agriculture chemical residues in raw products. 11. Controls on imported food and domestically produced foods should be designed to achieve the same level of protection. The importing country should avoid the unnecessary repetition of controls where these have been already validly carried out by the exporting country. In these cases a level of control equivalent to domestic controls should have been achieved at the stages prior to import. 12. The exporting country should provide access to enable the inspection and certification systems to be examined and evaluated, on request of the food control authorities of the importing country. Evaluations of inspection and certification systems carried out by the authorities of an importing country should take into account internal programme evaluations already carried out by the competent authority or evaluations performed by independent third-party bodies recognized by the competent authority in the exporting country. 13. Evaluations of inspection and certification systems by an importing country for purposes of establishing equivalence should take account of all relevant information held by the competent authority of the exporting country. Equivalency agreements 14. The application of equivalence principles may be in the form of agreements or letters of understanding established between governments either for inspection and/or certification of production areas, sectors or parts of sectors. Equivalence may also be established through the administration of a comprehensive agreement which would cover inspection and certification of all food commodity forms traded between two or more countries. 15. Agreements on the recognition of equivalence of inspection and certification systems may include provisions concerning: – the legislative framework, control programmes and administrative procedures; – contact points in inspection and certification services; -- 4 of 25 -- FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (5th Edition) 28 – demonstration by the exporting country of the effectiveness and adequacy of its enforcement and control programmes, including laboratories; – where relevant, lists of products or establishments subject to certification or approval, accredited facilities and accredited bodies; – mechanisms supporting continued recognition of equivalence, e.g., exchange of information on hazards and monitoring and surveillance. 16. Agreements should include mechanisms to provide for periodic review and updating and include procedural mechanisms for resolving differences arising within the framework of the agreement. SECTION 6 – INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEM INFRASTRUCTURE 17. Countries should identify the main objectives to be addressed through import and export inspection and certification systems. 18. Countries should have in place the legislative framework, controls, procedures, facilities, equipment, laboratories, transportation, communications, personnel and training to support the objectives of the inspection and certification programme. 19. Where different authorities in the same country have jurisdiction over different parts of the food chain, conflicting requirements must be avoided to prevent legal and commercial problems and obstacles to trade. For example, while provincial or state laws may exist there should be a competent authority at the national level capable of ensuring uniform application. However, an importing country authority may recognize a sub-national competent authority for purposes of inspection or certification where this arrangement is acceptable to the national authorities concerned. Legislative framework 20. For the purposes of this section, legislation includes acts, regulations, requirements or procedures, issued by public authorities, related to foodstuffs and covering the protection of public health, the protection of consumers and conditions of fair trading. 21. The effectiveness of controls related to foodstuffs depends on the quality and completeness of legislation for foods. Legislation should provide authority to carry out controls at all stages of production, manufacture, importation, processing, storage, transportation, distribution and trade. 22. Legislation may also include provisions as appropriate for the registration of establishments or listing of certified processing plants, establishment approval, -- 5 of 25 -- GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGN, OPERATION, ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION OF FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (CAC/GL 26-1997) 29 licensing or registration of traders, equipment design approval, penalties in the event of non-compliance, coding requirements and charging of fees. 23. The national competent authority in the exporting or importing country should have the ability to enforce and take action based on adequate legislation. It should take all necessary steps to insure the integrity, impartiality and independence of official inspection systems and officially recognized inspection systems and to ensure that the inspection programme contained in national legislation is delivered to a prescribed standard. Control programmes and operations 24. Control programmes help to ensure that inspection actions relate to objectives, since the results of these programmes can be assessed against the objectives set for the inspection and certification system. Inspection services should draw up control programmes based on precise objectives and appropriate risk analysis. In the absence of detailed scientific research, control programmes should be based on requirements developed from current knowledge and practice. Every effort should be made to apply risk analysis based on internationally-accepted methodology, where available. 25. In particular, countries should require or encourage the use of a HACCP approach by food establishments. Official inspectors should be trained in the assessment of the application of HACCP principles. Where programmes include the drawing and analysis of samples, adequate sampling and appropriately validated analytical methods should be established to ensure that the results are representative and reliable in relation to the specific objectives. 26. The elements of a control programme should include, as appropriate: – inspection; – sampling and analysis; – checks on hygiene, including personal cleanliness and clothing; – examination of written and other records; – examination of the results of any verification systems operated by the establishment; – audit of establishments by the national competent authority; – national audit and verification of the control programme. 27. Administrative procedures should be in place to ensure that controls by the inspection system are carried out: – regularly in proportion to risk; – where non-compliance is suspected; – in a co-ordinated manner between different authorities, if several exist. -- 6 of 25 -- FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (5th Edition) 30 28. Controls should cover, as appropriate: – establishments, installations, means of transport, equipment and material; – raw materials, ingredients, technological aids and other products used for the preparation and production of foodstuffs; – semi-finished and finished products; – materials and objects intended to come into contact with foodstuffs; – cleaning and maintenance prod