GUIDELINES FOR FOOD HYGIENE CONTROL MEASURES IN TRADITIONAL MARKETS FOR FOOD CXG 103-2024 Adopted in 2024 -- 1 of 13 -- CXG 103-2024 2 1. INTRODUCTION Traditional markets for food are dedicated spaces for food wholesalers, retailers and consumers to sell and purchase food for direct consumption, preparation and other uses. These markets have many names around the globe that include, but are not limited to, street food markets, local markets, public markets, community markets, municipal markets, open-air markets, wet markets and farmers’ markets. These markets could either be open air or enclosed and vary widely in size and the number of people who trade in them. They could also have formal or informal management structures with varying levels of infrastructure. Handling, preparation, artisanal processing and packaging also take place in these markets. Traditional markets for food are important food sources that supply affordable and readily-accessible food to households, both raw and ready-to-eat foods. They also provide employment opportunities in the various nodes of the food value chain. Despite the benefits derived from traditional markets for food, hygienic handling practices in these markets are often inadequate. These guidelines will provide competent authorities, food business operators (FBOs) and consumers with the necessary knowledge to strengthen food hygienic capacities in these markets to assure food safety in the framework of a One Health approach. 2. OBJECTIVES The guideline is intended to provide guidance in developing and implementing policies and regulations to ensure that traditional markets for food are designed and managed effectively to promote food safety. The guidelines provide FBOs, consumers, market authorities and other stakeholders with advice on food hygiene – including food handling, personnel health, training and education, environment and hygiene relevant to ensuring food safety. 3. SCOPE AND USE 3.1 Scope These guidelines provide guidance on food safety regulation and hygienic handling activities to all stakeholders relevant to traditional markets for food where raw, prepared and/or ready-to-eat foods are sold. 3.2 Use These guidelines are intended for use by competent authorities and other stakeholders in the development and/or implementation of food safety control measures in traditional markets for food where:  Competent authorities have an overall responsibility to decide how this guideline is applied, in coordination with the market authorities, where they exist.  FBOs should apply the hygienic practices set out in this document to provide food that is safe and suitable for consumption.  Consumers should follow relevant instructions and apply appropriate hygiene measures. This guideline should be used in conjunction with relevant Codex texts, including but not limited to the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969).1 4. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these guidelines, the terms used herein should have the following definitions: Competent authority: The government authority or official body authorized by the government that is responsible for the setting of regulatory food safety requirements and/or for the organization of official controls including enforcement (CXC 1-1969).1 Consumer: Persons and families purchasing and receiving food in order to meet their personal needs (General standard for the labelling of prepackaged foods [CXS 1-1985]).2 Crockery/Cutlery: All tools used for food preparation, serving and consumption (whether non-disposable or disposable), and they include glasses, plates, dishes, cups, saucers, spoons, forks, ladles, chopsticks, etc. (Regional code of hygienic practice for street-vended foods in Asia [CXC 76R-2017]).3 Equipment: The whole or part of any apparatus, vessels, containers, utensils, machines, instruments or appliances for use in preparing, storing, handling, cleaning, selling, or supplying/delivering food (CXC 76R- 2017).3 -- 2 of 13 -- CXG 103-2024 3 Food: Any substance, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, which is intended for human consumption, and includes drinks, chewing gum and any substance which has been used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of “food” but does not include cosmetics or tobacco or substances used only as drugs (General standard for the labelling of prepackaged foods [CXS 1-1985]).2 Food business operator (FBO): The entity responsible for operating a business at any step in the food chain (General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969).1 Food handler: Any person who directly handles packaged or unpacked food, food equipment and utensils used for food, or surfaces that come into contact with food and that is expected, therefore, to comply with food hygiene requirements (CXC 1-1969).1 Food hygiene: All conditions and measures necessary to ensure the safety and suitability of food at all stages of the food chain (CXC 1-1969).1 Food grade: Refers to materials and products that are safe for use in food handling, processing, storage, packaging, and serving. Food safety: Assurance that food will not cause adverse health effects to the consumer when it is prepared and/or eaten according to its intended use (CXC 1-1969).1 Food vendors: Refers to those who sell food in a traditional market for food. Hazard: A biological, chemical or physical agent in food with the potential to cause an adverse health effect (CXC 1-1969).1 Market authority: The entity or person responsible for the administration of the traditional market which may include market committees and associations of FBOs. Perishable food: Food which is subject to rapid decay, spoilage and or growth of microorganisms with or without the production of toxins or metabolites when not kept under the required storage conditions (e.g. milk and milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, etc.) (Regional code of hygienic practice for street-vended foods in Asia [CXC 76R-2017]).3 Potable water: Water fit for human consumption (Guidelines for the safe use and reuse of water in food production and processing [CXG 100-2023]).4 Traditional markets for food: Spaces open to the public with physical infrastructures including premises or individual stalls for the food trade, generally from local FBOs, such as fruits, vegetables, food of animal origin, seeds/grains, ready-to-eat foods, street foods, preparation, and other uses. Examples include, but are not limited to, street food markets, local markets, public markets, community markets, municipal markets, open- air markets, wet markets and farmers’ markets. 5. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Policies and regulations Appropriate policies and regulations should be formulated and implemented with the aim of guiding operations to ensure food safety during food purchase, preparation, processing, storage, packaging, and consumption. Such requirements should be elaborated either separately or incorporated into existing food regulations with an outcome-based approach. The general hygienic requirements and practices to be followed by the FBOs should be translated by the competent authorities which can be applied considering the conditions and risk factors specific to each operation and/or locality. The risk of the operation should be evaluated in terms of market size, especially the size of the population of the city or town where it is placed, infrastructure, type of food sold and kind of activities. Competent and /or market authorities should approve the types of food that can be marketed, the location and characteristics of the points of sale, and incorporate details regarding the sanitary conditions that should be met. Competent authorities should:  regulate and promote food safety controls and the use of the guidelines established in this document in addition to CXC 1-1969.1  put in place and implement surveillance systems to detect and support foodborne illness outbreak investigations and management; and  implement and enforce regulatory measures including, but not limited to, the issuance of permits and licences, and where applicable, apply sanctions. -- 3 of 13 -- CXG 103-2024 4 Roles and responsibilities of competent authorities, and market authorities, FBOs and consumers should be clearly defined and documented, including their legal obligations. Market authorities in coordination with the FBOs should be responsible for day-to-day operations of the traditional market for food. Where applicable, market authorities should be empowered to assist the competent authorities with licensing and registration through a mutually agreed mechanism to oversee and promote food safety by FBOs. 5.2 Market infrastructure The traditional markets for foods should be designed and built to provide the basic infrastructure that promotes good hygienic practices for food handling and business operations as provided for by competent and/or market authorities to ensure food safety. The infrastructure should be suitable (e.g. smooth, easy to clean, free of cracks, not accumulating dirt etc.) for maintenance and sanitation activities. When planning market infrastructure, high-risk areas, such as where live animals, raw meat, poultry and fish are handled, should be physically separated from incompatible activities to prevent cross-contamination of foods. 5.3 Conditions for licensing/registration FBOs should meet the minimum requirements as set by competent authorities. It is essential that food handlers are competent in food hygiene practices before the FBO is issued with an operating licence/registration. The frequency and the type of training should be agreed upon by stakeholders considering the market requirements, kind of food products offered, FBO practices, and other aspects as appropriate. 5.4 Pest, animal and zoonotic foodborne agents control The market authorities and FBOs in traditional markets for food should provide effective mechanisms for the control of animals and pests (rats, mice, pigeons, insects, etc.). Any food found to have become contaminated/infested by animals and/or pests should be hygienically disposed of in a manner to prevent contamination/infestation of other foods. Pest and animal control with chemical, physical or biological agents should be carried out without posing a threat to the safety or suitability of food and people. Zoonotic foodborne agents should be managed with appropriate preventive measures, which may include washing hands after touching animals; cleaning and disinfection; and other steps necessary to prevent infection. In line with the One Health approach, handlers of wild animals and meat of wildlife should be made aware of the hazards associated with regional trade thereof, especially in order to prevent known and emerging zoonoses. 6. FOOD BUSINESS OPERATORS 6.1 Health status of food handlers Food handlers in traditional markets should be healthy. Where necessary, they should have regular health checks, medical examinations, and immunizations and medical certificates to support their health status. No food handlers shall be allowed to perform their duties if showing any symptoms of jaundice, diarrhoea, vomiting, fever, sore throat with fever, discharge from ear, eye, and nose, visibly infected skin lesions such as boils and cuts. In such cases, they shall cease from handling food in any capacity and seek medical treatment. Any food handler who has been identified as or is known to be a carrier of foodborne disease organism(s), shall not be involved in any food handling activity until certified fit by a medical practitioner. 6.2 Personal hygiene and behaviour Food handlers, during the conduct of their business, should observe the following:  wear clean clothing and appropriate personal protective equipment;  wash hands with soap and water, rinse, and dry them in a manner that does not re-contaminate the hands. Hand sanitizers should not replace hand washing and should be used only after hands have been washed; -- 4 of 13 -- CXG 103-2024 5  keep fingernails short and clean at all times and avoid wearing jewellery or ornaments during food preparation;  keep the hair, including facial hair clean, tidy, and covered during food handling;  cover cuts and wounds with suitable waterproof plasters;  smoking or chewing gum should not be allowed while preparing or serving food;  refrain from any unhygienic practices such as spitting and picking nose, ears, or touching any body part while handling food;  avoid sneezing or coughing over or onto the food; and  use food stalls exclusively for their intended purpose. 6.3 Training and competence Food handlers should undergo adequate training in food hygiene and demonstrate competence in safe food handling. Training on food hygiene should be provided by the competent authorities or other institutions recognized by the competent authorities. Food vendors should also be trained on their responsibility to offer safe and suitable food products to consumers. Relevant authorities, including extension and community health workers as appropriate, should engage market authorities and other stakeholders to assist in food handler training, especially those that are required before licensing, to facilitate the adoption of food handler training by FBOs. Simple posters illustrating the “dos” and “don’ts” of food handling during vending should be widely and prominently displayed in relevant places for the benefit of both food handlers and consumers. The training material should incorporate pictorials. The key information should be reinforced in short and crisp messages and where possible translated into the local languages. The training material may be waterproof so that food vendors can refer to it/ keep it/hang it on their food vending cart/stall. Training programmes should take into consideration the knowledge and skills levels of the food handlers being trained. 6.4 FBO associations The formation of FBO associations or cooperatives may be encouraged to provide support and a liaison point with the relevant authorities to facilitate the implementation of hygiene measures. FBO associations should encourage continuous capacity building and self-regulation for improved adherence to food safety requirements. 6.5 FBOs responsibilities FBOs are responsible for the hygiene and protection of the food they handle and for all aspects related to its safety including:  developing, implementing, and verifying processes that provide food that is safe and suitable for its intended use;  providing an efficient record-keeping system, as appropriate to support food safety;  ensuring personnel are competent as appropriate to their job activities;  ensuring there is a simple one-step forward, one-step back traceability system in the food chain where applicable;  implementing a complaint management system for consumers;  building a positive food safety culture by demonstrating their commitment to providing safe and suitable food and encouraging appropriate food safety practices; 