GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF BIOLOGICAL FOODBORNE OUTBREAKS CXG 96-2022 Adopted in 2022 -- 1 of 20 -- CXG 96-2022 2 1. INTRODUCTION Foodborne illnesses encompass a wide spectrum of illnesses and are an important public health problem. They are the result of ingestion of foodstuffs contaminated with biological hazards (biological foodborne illness) or chemicals (chemical foodborne illness). The contamination of food may occur at any stage in the process from primary production through to the consumer and can result from the presence of biological hazards in animal production and/or cross-contamination and spread to other foods by handlers, environmental contamination, equipment, water, soil, or air. Biological foodborne illness usually takes the form of gastrointestinal symptoms; however, such illnesses can also have neurological, gynaecological, immunological, and other symptoms. The symptoms can range from mild to severe in the acute phase with recovery within days or weeks but also can have severe chronic consequences for the individuals due to long-term sequelae with serious health effects or even death. Biological foodborne outbreaks can have significant socioeconomic costs related to hospitalization, medical treatment, and effects on productivity and income. In particular, they are important for vulnerable sub- populations that have a higher risk of illness. For food businesses, the consequences can be lost markets, loss of consumer confidence, litigation, and company closures. Such foodborne outbreaks can cause impediments to domestic production and international trade. Globalization of the food supply has led to the rapid and widespread international distribution of foods, further increasing opportunities for pathogens being inadvertently introduced into many geographical areas. Codex Alimentarius has issued several guidelines for food businesses and competent authorities on hygienic practices to ensure food safety. Those guidelines focus on prevention, monitoring, and corrective actions in case of deviations along the production processes. Despite efforts to ensure a high level of hygiene, foodborne outbreaks still occur. In order to handle biological foodborne outbreaks efficiently, local and national multiagency networks of preparedness should be in place. To facilitate a common understanding and a consistent approach to these situations, such networks should use comparable methods, common definitions and interpretations to the extent possible, as well as transparent exchange of information. Cooperation through international networks is essential and should be a feature of any national network. Communication and data sharing between and among networks, food business operators – nationally and internationally – is fundamental for the management of foodborne outbreaks. Existing procedures on confidentiality should be used or, if not present, procedures should be developed. The principles for risk analysis including risk assessment, risk management and risk communication, as described in the Codex Alimentarius Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Food Safety for Application by Governments (CXG 62-2007) 1 should form the framework/basis for the establishment of a system for preparedness and management of foodborne outbreaks. The risk management measures chosen will vary according to the situation and the regulatory framework of the competent authorities. Within the available analytical methods, molecular methods often best contribute to the detection of clusters of human cases and allow them to be linked to the food source when used in conjunction with epidemiological analysis. They also help to better identify batches/lots of food involved and the root cause; hence reducing the exposure of humans to hazards. In particular, the use of specific genetic methods (e.g. pulsed-field gel electrophoresis [PFGE], whole genome sequencing [WGS], multiple-locus variable number of tandem repeat analysis [MLVA] and multilocus sequence typing [MLST]) can result in improved detection of outbreaks, including detection of associated or linked cases, when the country has adequate resources to implement them. The increase in the use of these methods will likely lead to the detection of more clusters and the need for enhanced preparedness. The decision to categorize an outbreak as an incident, an emergency or crisis is at the discretion of the competent authorities and should be consistent at both local and national level. The following criteria may be used by the competent authorities to categorize the outbreak and to develop and adapt response plans:  the number of cases, the geographical spread of the outbreak, and whether the outbreak is ongoing;  the disease severity and its consequences, including the number of deaths and treatment options available;  the population affected, for example, more vulnerable groups;  the pathogenicity (virulence/infectivity) of the microorganism;  the source of contamination and the history of the establishment and business; -- 2 of 20 -- CXG 96-2022 3  the distribution pattern, whether the contaminated food is still available for sale or consumption, the volume of the food and national and international trade implications;  consumer perception (e.g. referring to an outbreak as a “crisis”) can affect the consumer confidence in a product or food category clearly not belonging to the consignment implicated;  the need to remove or reduce risk to consumers through public health action such as product recall risk communication including media alerts;  likely exposure and consumption patterns;  whether or not the outbreak was intentional (e.g. the consequence of fraud or bioterrorism);  whether the hazard is known or unknown; and  the capacity of the country and/or local entities to quickly react and limit the extent of the outbreak, considering when rural areas are involved, communication and transportation, health care providers and diagnostic resources. 2. SCOPE These guidelines provide guidance to competent authorities on the preparedness for and management of foodborne outbreaks, including the communication with international networks, such as the International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN) and notification to the World Health Organization (WHO) under the international health regulations (IHR) when it is necessary. The guidance addresses preparedness, detection, and response with the intent of limiting the extent of such outbreaks. They include recommendations on the appropriate use of new analytical technologies, for example, genetic typing methods in outbreak investigation. The scope is limited to biological hazards, as they are the predominant cause of foodborne outbreaks. These guidelines also describe the role of competent authorities at the local, national and, where applicable, the international level (e.g. groups of countries) and the collaboration among them in official network structures. Guidelines are included on collaboration and communication with food business operators and other stakeholders before and during foodborne outbreaks, as well as on post-outbreak measures and outbreak management review when an outbreak has been declared over. Maintenance of the structures and training methods to strengthen the response by the networks are also addressed. 3. USE The following Codex Alimentarius documentsi are relevant for these guidelines:  Principles and Guidelines for the Exchange of Information in Food Safety Emergency Situations (CXG 19-1995).2  Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Food Safety for Application by Governments (CXG 62-2007).1  Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CXG 30-1999).3  Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CXG 63-2007).4  Principles and Guidelines for National Food Control Systems (CXG 82-2013).5 A number of FAO/WHO documents describe in more detail some of the issues presented in these guidelines. In foodborne outbreaks involving zoonotic agents, the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) standards for the prevention, detection, and control of zoonotic agents at the primary production stages should also be considered. 4. DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this document the following definitions apply: Biological hazards: Biological agents including microorganisms that have the capacity to cause harmful effects in humans. These include, for example, bacteria and their toxins, viruses, and parasites. Case-control study: An observational study in which subjects are included on the basis of presence (cases) or absence (controls) of the foodborne illness of interest. Information is compared between cases and controls. i http://www.fao.org/fao-who-codexalimentarius/codex-texts/guidelines/en/ -- 3 of 20 -- CXG 96-2022 4 Case definition: A set of criteria for determining whether a person affected by the illness under investigation should be classified as belonging to the outbreak. As such, it is an epidemiological tool for counting cases. It may include clinical and laboratory criteria, a defined period of time, and, as appropriate, limitation/restriction to a place (for example a particular event or restaurant). In some cases criteria could include a limitation based on personal characteristics (for example age). Cluster: In epidemiological terms, it describes a group of cases linked by time or place, but with no identified common food or other source. In terms of biological hazards, isolates having the same specific molecular profile or closely related profiles identified by laboratory analyses of specimens from cases. Cohort study: An observational study in which the occurrence of illness among those who were exposed to a suspected risk factor is compared with the occurrence among those who were not. These studies are feasible for well-defined outbreaks in which all exposed and all non-exposed persons are generally identifiable. Descriptive epidemiology: The aspect of epidemiology concerned with organizing and summarizing health- related data according to the occurrence of disease, in terms of both geographical comparisons and descriptions of temporal trends. Foodborne outbreak: The occurrence where the observed number of cases of a particular illness that may be foodborne exceeds the expected number, or the occurrence of two or more cases of a similar foodborne illness resulting from the ingestion of a common food and epidemiologic analysis implicates the food as the source of the illness. Lot: A definite quantity of ingredients or of a food that is intended to have uniform character and quality, within specified limits, is produced, packaged, and labelled under the same conditions, and is assigned a unique reference identification by the food business operator. It may also be referred to as a “batch”. Metadata: Data that describe other data. In relation to analytical testing results, metadata could be date of sample collection, identification of sample, sample size, product name, sampling site, etc. Monitoring: The performance of routine analysis aimed at detecting biological contamination of, for example, food from which prevalence data may be ascertained. Outbreak analysis: An analysis based on the information available on the foodborne outbreak as well as relevant historical data. It is used to forecast if more cases should be expected under the given circumstances and to finalize tracing information pointing to a source and comparing it with epidemiological outbreak information. Rapid risk assessment: A risk assessment, based on the information available on the foodborne outbreak, which needs to be carried out urgently to quickly support (provisional) risk management measures and therefore may not always contain the full development of the four steps of a risk assessment described in the Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CXG 30-1999).3 Risk communication: The exchange of information on the biological risk among stakeholders (e.g. government, academia, industry, public, mass media and international organizations). Surveillance: A systematic and ongoing set of observation or measurement activities, collection, analysis, and interpretation of data from samples from, for example, humans, animals, feed, food, or environment for early detection with the purpose of applying appropriate control measures to prevent foodborne illness. Traceability/Product tracing: The ability to follow the movement of a food through specified stage(s) of production, processing, and distribution, where “tracing back” refers to following the path towards its origin/source and “tracing forward” refers to following the path towards its final distribution/to the consumer. 5. FOODBORNE OUTBREAKS – PREPAREDNESS SYSTEM To handle foodborne outbreaks in an effective way, it is advisable to have and maintain preparedness structures enabling cooperation between competent authorities. In this section, such structures are described in the form of official networks at different organizational levels, along with some of the good practices and standard tools to include in the system. 5.1 Creation of official networks between human health sector and food and veterinary sectors at local and national levels In the following paragraphs, the composition and tasks of the networks of competent authorities within a country are described. Competent authorities, other than those at the national/federal level, are referred to as “local” and these may contain sublevels that should also be involved. -- 4 of 20 -- CXG 96-2022 5 At the local level, defined networks between contact points from the different relevant authorities/agencies covering the same geographical area should be formed, for example, local food control authority, local veterinary authorities, clinical microbiological laboratory, local departments of health/local health authorities, community council and food/veterinary laboratory. The contact points may be either persons or offices as long as they consist of personnel usually participating in the relevant tasks relating to the investigation of foodborne outbreaks at the local level. The tasks of the network contact points are to ensure the exchange of information within the network and coordination of the work with the staff responsible for the various tasks involved in outbreak investigation and management. To ensure cooperation within the local network, one of the contact points should be designated as the local network contact point in charge of the network. The local network contact points should also ensure the timely exchange of information with their respective counterparts in the national network and, if relevant, with the respective contact points in the other local networks. They should establish channels to engage stakeholders, including food business operators, where relevant, in order to exchange information to minim