PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING THE PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL FOOD CONTROL SYSTEMS CXG 91-2017 Adopted in 2017. -- 1 of 10 -- CXG 91-2017 2 SECTION 1 INTRODUCTION 1. An effective national food control system (NFCS) is essential for ensuring the safety and suitability of food for consumers and ensuring fair practices. An effective NFCS may employ different approaches, core elements, and components, as appropriate to the national circumstances, and as described in the Principles and Guidelines for National Food Control Systems (CXG 82-2013). 2. The policy setting, design, implementation and other technical components of the NFCS should operate effectively over the course of time, and have the capacity and capability to undergo continuous improvement. As scientific and technical advances occur, it is important that the NFCS demonstrates its ability to adapt. 3. The monitoring and system review function of the NFCS calls on the competent authority1 to regularly assess the effectiveness and appropriateness of the NFCS in achieving its objectives of protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in the food trade.2 The evidence generated through monitoring and system review informs the policy setting, system design, and implementation functions of the NFCS. 4. This document presents a performance monitoring framework to support the monitoring and system review function of the NFCS as described in section 4.4 of CXG 82-2013. The guidance is not intended to be used as a basis for comparing systems or imposing barriers to trade. 5. Many strategies for performance monitoring exist, but there is no guidance specific to performance monitoring for an NFCS. This document seeks to fill this gap. 6. Other assessment tools, like the FAO/WHO food control system assessment tool, can be used in conjunction with performance monitoring to provide a comprehensive view of the NFCS. SECTION 2 PURPOSE OF GUIDANCE 7. This document describes a logical framework of planning, monitoring, and system review steps for performance monitoring of an NFCS and establishes a common understanding of performance monitoring principles, terminology, and best practices. 8. The guidance is intended to support self-assessment of countries NFCS. 9. This guidance focuses on planning steps within the performance monitoring framework that establish a foundation for assessing the effectiveness of the NFCS and for facilitating continuous improvement as appropriate. 10. A competent authority can use this framework to implement monitoring and system review, or incorporate this approach to make existing processes more robust. SECTION 3 DEFINITIONS3 Activity: Actions taken or work performed through which inputs are mobilized to produce specific outputs. Assessment: A process of determining the presence or absence of a certain condition or component, or the degree to which a condition is fulfilled. Effectiveness: The extent to which NFCS objectives or related outcomes were achieved, or, are expected to be achieved, taking into account their relative importance. Indicator: Quantitative variable or qualitative factor that provides a simple and reliable means to measure achievement, to reflect the changes connected to activities, or to help assess the performance of a program or system. Inputs: The financial, human, technical and material resources used for activities. Outcome: Intended effects or results that contribute to achieving the NFCS Objectives. Outcomes may be categorized at different levels, such as ultimate, high-level, intermediate, preliminary, or initial. Outputs: The products and services which result from activities; may also include changes resulting from activities which are relevant to the achievement of outcomes. Performance monitoring: A continuous or ongoing process of collecting and analyzing data to compare how well the stated objectives and outcomes of the NFCS are achieved. 1 Throughout the document “competent authority” refers to one or more competent authorities. 2 Throughout this document, the term “Objectives” refers to the NFCS Objectives Principles and Guidelines for National Food Control Systems (CXG 82-2013). 3 Most definitions were adapted from OECD. 2002. “Glossary of Key Terms in Evaluation and Results-Based Management.” Paris: OECD/DAC. -- 2 of 10 -- CXG 91-2017 3 SECTION 4 PRINCIPLES OF THE PERFORMANCE MONITORING FRAMEWORK 11. In a comprehensive approach, a competent authority would monitor its performance across all components of the NFCS. However, depending on the priorities and capabilities of the competent authority, it may be more practical and affordable to apply the performance monitoring framework in a phased or targeted approach. A targeted approach is application of performance monitoring to specific programs or components of the NFCS. A phased approach is a gradual expansion of the performance monitoring framework as capacity within a country grows. 12. Regardless of whether it is used in a comprehensive, phased, or targeted approach, the performance monitoring framework is characterized by the following principles: Principle 1 Relevancy 13. It is customized to the unique needs and structure of the NFCS, and uses information collected from within and outside the system to identify gaps, optimize operations, and promote continuous improvement. Principle 2 Transparency 14. It is open to consultation and review by relevant national stakeholders during multiple stages of the process, while respecting legal requirements to protect confidential information as appropriate. Principle 3 Efficiency and Reliability 15. It should operate within its current capacity to remain practicable and affordable. It builds on existing data collection and program management and utilizes appropriate external data sources to assess the performance of its NFCS. Attention should be given to the quality and reliability of the data. Principle 4 Responsiveness 16. It is adaptive to changes to the NFCS and the environment in which it operates and accommodates revisions to both the outcomes sought, associated activities, and the indicators applied. SECTION 5 PERFORMANCE MONITORING FRAMEWORK FOR AN NFCS 17. Countries should have established an NFCS or components of an NFCS prior to using this framework. 18. The performance monitoring framework presents a cyclical process (refer fig 1) that includes three broad tasks: planning, monitoring, and system review. Performance monitoring is an on-going process, where each step feeds into the next step in the cycle and will be revisited over time.  Through the planning steps, the competent authority identifies specific and related outcomes through which the NFCS contributes to its objectives and identifies indicators that can measure progress toward the outcomes. The planning steps establish a foundation for monitoring and system review.  Through the monitoring steps, the competent authority collects data and generates the information necessary.  Through the system review steps, the competent authority uses information generated through the monitoring steps to assess the effectiveness and appropriateness of the NFCS. This can confirm that the relevant component(s) are operating as intended, and facilitate continuous improvement as necessary. -- 3 of 10 -- CXG 91-2017 4 Planning Monitoring & System Review Figure 1: Performance Monitoring Framework SECTION 5.1 PLANNING STEPS 19. The planning steps are arranged in logical order, in which a preceding step supports or enables the next step. For example, it is necessary to identify the intended outcomes (step 2) before identifying indicators to measure progress toward those outcomes (step 3). 20. Upon completion of these steps, the competent authority will have clearly defined the specific outcomes that the NFCS is designed to achieve and developed a plan for monitoring progress towards achieving these outcomes. Step 1: Preparation 21. Effective performance monitoring requires organisational commitment, established processes, and sufficient resources and technical capacity. The first step of the performance monitoring framework is to conduct a assessment to determine the competent authority’s current capacity for monitoring and system review. The following paragraphs may assist the competent authority in assessing their readiness to design and implement a performance monitoring framework. 22. Organizational commitment is essential for ensuring that monitoring and system review are prioritized and resourced as an integral component of the NFCS. The following questions can help the competent authority to assess the level of organizational commitment to monitoring and system review:  What are the legislative or policy objectives of the NFCS and how does the competent authority support those objectives?  How does the competent authority intend to support performance monitoring at various levels of the NFCS?  How does the competent authority intend to use performance monitoring data (e.g. to assess the effectiveness of the NFCS and take preventive or corrective action or improve the system as appropriate)? 1. Preparation 2. Define outcomes to monitor and evaluate 3. Establish Indicators 4. Create Monitoring Plan 5. Collect and Analyze Data 6. Report and Incorporate Findings -- 4 of 10 -- CXG 91-2017 5 23. Established processes for data collection and program management can be used for monitoring and system review. The following questions can help the competent authority to assess established processes that support monitoring and system review:  What types of data are currently being collected?  How is the data used (i.e. what types of information is being generated and for what purpose)?  What are the existing processes for data collection and analysis?  What are the existing processes for ensuring data quality?  What are the existing processes for reporting data on results or progress toward goals or objectives?  How is data currently being used to assess the effectiveness of different programs or components? 24. Monitoring and system review requires sufficient financial and human resources with relevant expertise to support the collection and use of data. The following questions can help the competent authority to assess existing resources and technical capacity:  What resources (financial, human, technical and material) are available to support monitoring and system review? How can existing resources be leveraged if necessary?  Does the competent authority have access to individuals with expertise in strategic planning, performance management, program management, analysis, and data management? 25. If the competent authority lacks sufficient capacity or resources to monitor performance of the entire NFCS, the competent authority may implement monitoring and system review in a phased or targeted approach, beginning with a limited number of priority components. The competent authority may use CXG 82-2013 in conjunction with national goals to identify priority components for a phased or targeted approach. 26. If the competent authority decides to implement monitoring and system review in a phased or targeted approach, the competent authority should consider steps to address these challenges to enable comprehensive performance monitoring at a later date.  If there is insufficient human resource capacity, the competent authority should develop a plan to develop capacity where necessary, setting the shortest possible deadlines for completion.  If there are insufficient financial resources available, the competent authority should seek out additional funding from national or international sources, setting the shortest possible deadlines for completion. 27. On a regular basis, the competent authority should revisit the above assessment. As capacity for monitoring and system review improves, or becomes available, the competent authority may consider a more comprehensive approach. Step 2: Define Outcomes to Monitor and Evaluate 28. Monitoring and system review should go beyond measuring the outputs of activities and focus on measuring intended effects or outcomes. Outcomes capture what has to be achieved for success, as opposed to what processes or steps need to be completed. By defining and monitoring outcomes, a competent authority can make more informed decisions and better target its programs and resources to achieve the objectives it is seeking. 29. In addition to capturing what is to be achieved, outcomes should follow SMART criteria.  Specific: What exactly is going to be achieved?  Measurable: Can the outcome be measured through qualitative or quantitative indicators?  Attainable: Is the outcome in line with the competent authority’s competencies and authorities?  Relevant: Will achieving an outcome contribute to achieving the NFCS Objectives?  Time-bound: Can a timescale be defined for achieving the outcome? 30. The competent authority should engage relevant stakeholders in a participatory process for the identification and general understanding of the outcomes to be achieved. 31. The starting point for defining outcomes will depend on the competent authority’s approach to monitoring and system review. In a comprehensive approach, a competent authority may start by defining an NFCS Objective or a national goal as the highest-level outcome to be achieved. If the competent authority decides to implement monitoring and system review in a phased or targeted approach, it should identify the highest-level outcome that is applicable to their approach. -- 5 of 10 -- CXG 91-2017 6 32. After defining the starting point, the competent authority should ask “How will this be achieved?” to identify the next level of outcomes that contribute to achieving the highest-level outcome. There may be several intermediate or lower-level outcomes that contribute to achieving the highest-level outcome. The competent authority can ensure that all of the relevant outcomes have been identified by asking “What else is necessary?” to achieve the highest-level outcome. 33. This process of asking “How will this be achieved?” and “What else is necessary?” should be repeated for each intermediate and lower-level outcome until no further outcomes can be identified. For outcomes at the lowest-levels, the answer to “How will this be achieved?” will usually be outputs or activities. 34. Through this process, the competent authority will develop an outcome framework that visually reflects the causal or logical processes that contribute to achieving the highest-level outcome. When read from the top down, an outcome framework explains how each outcome will be achieved – by first achieving the outcomes at the next lowest level. When read from the bottom up, it explains why each outcome is important – because it contributes to achieving an outcome at the next highest level. See Appendix A for an example of a simplified outcome framework. 35. There are other approaches th