GUIDELINES FOR THE SAFE USE AND REUSE OF WATER IN FOOD PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING CXG 100-2023 Adopted in 2023. Revised in 2024. -- 1 of 30 -- CXG 100-2023 2 2024 Revisions Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, Annex III was added. -- 2 of 30 -- CXG 100-2023 3 1. INTRODUCTION Water has an important role in all stages of the food chain from initial sourcing, storage, treatment, distribution, use in irrigation of food crops and forage for animals, primary production, and food processing through to consumption of the final food. It is used as an ingredient, in direct and indirect contact (e.g. washing, cooling the product, or cleaning of equipment surfaces) with food, food packaging, and for hygiene sanitation in food processing. The important role of water in food production has led to the need to ensure its safety and quality since it can be a carrier for the transmission of diseases, contamination or unwanted sensory attributes. Water is a dwindling resource worldwide and not all food producers and processors have access to safe water sources, or this access may be limited. Noting that the availability and microbiological quality of water are different in each country, region, context, setting and food establishment, water should always be fit for use for each specific purpose, and it should be managed in a way that the safety of food is ensured, while simultaneously avoiding unnecessary consumption and waste. Water used along the food production and processing chain can have different microbiological quality requirements, and types of water other than potable water may be suitable for certain purposes, provided that they do not compromise the safety of the final product for the consumer. Requirements for water safety should therefore be considered in context, considering the purpose of the water use, the potential hazards associated with the water use, and whether there is any subsequent measure to decrease the potential for contamination along the food chain. A risk-based approach to water sourcing, treatment, handling, storage, and use can help in identifying the hazards associated with the water and its use and determine treatments, if applicable, that water needs to undergo to meet the safety parameters specific to each intended use. This approach can also provide a means to address many of the water access and safety challenges associated with reuse based on the principle of using the right type of water for the intended purpose/need. Deciding whether water is fit-for-purpose should be based on a hazard analysis that considers risk factors such as those associated with the source water, the end use of the food product (e.g. whether the food is eaten raw – without steps that would mitigate potential hazards introduced by the water source), and management options such as treatment options and their efficacy and the application of multiple barrier processes for risk mitigation. These guidelines respond to the need for a document outlining a risk-based approach to safe sourcing, use and reuse of water fit-for-purpose, rather than focusing on the use of potable water or water of other quality types (e.g. clean water). Using the risk-based approach outlined in these guidelines will allow for a specific assessment of the fitness of the water for the intended purpose. Associated annexes provide product-specific guidelines for the sourcing, collection, storage, treatment, handling, distribution, use and reuse of water in both direct and indirect contact with food throughout the food chain. The annexes also provide examples such as decision tree tools (DTTs) that can help to determine if water is fit-for-purpose. 2. OBJECTIVES These Guidelines for the safe use and reuse of water in food production and processing aim to:  provide guidance for food business operators (FBOs) and competent authorities on the application of a risk-based approach for the use and reuse of water that is fit-for-purpose; and  provide practical guidance and tools (e.g. DTTs) and risk-based microbiological criteria as examples to help FBOs evaluate risks and potential interventions of water as part of their food hygiene system. 3. PURPOSE AND SCOPE These guidelines provide a framework of general principles and examples for applying a risk-based approach to determine if the water to be sourced, used, and reused by FBOs involved in production and processing of relevant commodities is fit-for-purpose by addressing microbiological hazards, such as parasites, bacteria, and viruses. 4. USE The document is intended for use by FBOs (primary producers, packing houses, manufacturers, processors) and competent authorities as appropriate. -- 3 of 30 -- CXG 100-2023 4 These guidelines are complementary to and should be used in conjunction with all relevant Codex texts, including but not limited to: the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),1 the Code of hygienic practice for fresh fruits and vegetables (CXC 53-2003),2 the Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52- 2003),3 the Code of hygienic practice for milk and milk products (CXC 57-2004),4 the Principles and guidelines for the conduct of microbiological risk management (MRM) (CXG 63-2007),5 the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997),6 the Code of practice on food allergen management for food business operators (CXC 80-2020),7 the Code of hygienic practice for meat (CXC 58-2005),8 and the Principles and guidelines for the conduct of microbiological risk assessment (CXG 30-1999).9 5. GENERAL PRINCIPLES a) Water, as well as ice and steam made from water, used at any stage of the food chain, should be fit for its intended purpose, as determined by a risk-based approach comprising the evaluation of microbiological, chemical and physical hazards and should not compromise the safety of finished foods for consumers. b) When reusing, water should be treated or reconditioned, effectively monitored and the treatment should be validated to eliminate or reduce hazards to an acceptable level according to its intended use. c) In all situations, water sourcing, use and reuse should be part of an FBO´s food hygiene system. d) When using water as an ingredient in food, it should be potable. 6. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this document the following definitions apply: Clean water: water that does not meet the criteria for potable water but does not compromise the safety of the food in the context of its use. Potable water: water fit for human consumption. Recirculated water: water reused in a closed loop for the same processing operation without replenishment. Reclaimed water: water that was originally a constituent of a food material, which has been removed from the food material by a process step and is intended to be subsequently reused in a food processing operation. Reconditioning: the treatment of water intended for reuse by means designed to eliminate or reduce microbiological contaminants to an acceptable level according to its intended use. Recycled water: water which has been obtained from a step in the food production or food processing operation to be reused in the same, prior or a subsequent step of the operation, after reconditioning, when necessary. Reuse water: water that has been recovered from a processing step within the food operation, including from the food components and/or water that, after reconditioning treatment(s) as necessary, is intended to be reused in the same, prior or a subsequent step of the food processing operation. Types of reuse water can include reclaimed water from food, recycled water from food operations, or recirculated water in a closed loop system. Wastewater: used water that has been contaminated because of human activities. Water fit-for-purpose: water that is determined to be safe for an intended purpose through the identification, evaluation, and understanding of potential microbiological hazards and other relevant factors (e.g. history of use, the intended use of the food, etc.), including the application of control measures such as treatment options and their efficacy to ensure effective elimination or mitigation of such hazards. Water sourcing: the act of identifying and obtaining water for food production from a particular water source (e.g. groundwater, surface water, captured water). 7. WATER FIT-FOR-PURPOSE ASSESSMENT Assessing if water is fit-for-purpose is required for all sectors and steps in the food chain. Risk principles (i.e. a risk-based approach) should be applied in evaluating if the water is fit-for-purpose during sourcing, collection, storage, treatment, handling, use and reuse. Conducting such an assessment requires complete knowledge of the water system, the diversity and magnitude of the hazards that may exist, and the capacity of existing processes and infrastructure to address and control risks. -- 4 of 30 -- CXG 100-2023 5 Water fit-for-purpose assessments also require the identification of potential microbiological hazards with the capacity to cause damage to water safety and their sources and should also address safe water sourcing, use or reuse, when developing and implementing the plan. Additional factors to be considered could include water storage and distribution, including the hygienic design and the need for special expertise. Water use and reuse systems should be subjected to routine, risk-based monitoring and verification of appropriate parameters. The frequency of monitoring and verification can be dictated by different factors such as the source of the water or its prior condition, the efficacy of any treatments, and the intended use and reuse of the water. Relevant routine monitoring data by environmental agencies and public health organizations could be also useful in determining the frequency of monitoring and verification activities. In the context of safe water sourcing, collection, treatment, handling, storage, use and reuse, water fit-for- purpose assessments can include the following risk-based approaches:  Descriptive assessment (least comprehensive) – an onsite as well as a document-based evaluation from which a written descriptive assessment is generated. Examples include a sanitary inspection used in evaluating and managing risks from irrigation water and rapid assessment of water safety.  Semi-quantitative water assessment – the development and use of risk matrices that establish categories of risks from high to low, including consideration of sanitary conditions and their likelihood and estimated frequencies of unacceptable sanitary conditions. These are normally used for planning, prioritization and a rapid assessment of the safety and quality of water sources collection, storage, treatment, and handling.  Quantitative microbial water assessment (QMWA) (most comprehensive) – a mathematical modelling approach that can be used for estimating risks related to water use with a health outcome target. QMWA helps identify how much of an impact a pathogenic microorganism will have on the health of the population e.g. guiding wastewater use in agriculture. 8. WATER SAFETY MANAGEMENT Water fit-for-purpose assessments can be used for management decisions in setting target objectives for water sources and treatments for achieving public health outcomes, performance targets (e.g. food safety objectives, performance objectives), acceptable levels of risk and treatment process efficacies as appropriate. Risks associated with the use of water should be managed with measures implemented within the framework of a structured food hygiene system with monitoring and verification activities in place to ensure that the system is operating as expected. As part of the food hygiene system, where appropriate, all water systems should be mapped in a process flow diagram and evaluated in the hazard analysis. Once potential hazards and their sources have been identified, the risks associated with each hazard or hazardous event should be compared so that priorities for risk management can be established and documented. A semi-quantitative matrix might be useful to identify hazards and prioritize control measures for risk management purposes. Treatment or reconditioning of water intended for fit-for-purpose use and reuse should be based on hazard analysis of the sourced water and, where deemed necessary, treatments should ensure that hazards are eliminated, controlled or reduced to an acceptable level. 9. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS Decision support systems (DSS) tools, such as decision trees (DTs) or matrices, are considered to be useful risk management tools to assist stakeholders in making decisions to determine if water is fit-for-purpose and the required quality for use or reuse at a given step in the supply chain. DSS should allow for the diversity in food production, resulting in different types of risks and risk management steps necessary to ensure the water’s fitness for purpose in food production. Examples include the food types involved and their intended use; the food-water interactions; the specific waterborne food safety hazards; and their likelihood and magnitude of transmission to the consumer when present in different foods. An example of a risk-based DSS tool with further guidance is provided in Figure 1. -- 5 of 30 -- CXG 100-2023 6 Figure 1. Example of a risk-based DSS framework tool for the purpose of deciding if reused water can be used in either a food-contact application or a not-for-food-contact application for microbiological hazards Source: Authors’ own elaboration based on Figure 8 from MRA33. -- 6 of 30 -- CXG 100-2023 7 Annex I FRESH PRODUCE 1. INTRODUCTION Water can be a source of contamination of all microbiological pathogens associated with the consumption of fresh produce. These pathogens include bacteria such as, but are not limited to, Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., Campylobacter spp., Listeria monocytogenes and pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli spp., and also viruses such as hepatitis A and norovirus, and parasites such as Cyclospora spp., Giardia spp. and Cryptosporidium spp. Water is used at all steps in the production chain of fresh produce, from irrigation and other pre-harvest practices, such as fertilization and pesticide application, during harvesting, such as washing in the field, and post-harvest practices, such as cooling, transporting, washing and rinsing, until final washing steps by the consumer. Control measures to prevent water from becoming a source of microbiological contamination of the fresh produce, should be considered at all stages, and an overall management strategy should be developed, taking into account risk factors and control measures applicable at each step. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE The purpose and scope of this annex are to elaborate guidelines for the safe sourcing, use and reuse of water in direct an