GUIDELINES FOR RISK ANALYSIS OF FOODBORNE ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE CXG 77-2011 Adopted in 2011. Revised in 2021. -- 1 of 28 -- CXG 77-2011 2 1. INTRODUCTION 2. SCOPE 3. DEFINITIONS 4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR FOODBORNE AMR RISK ANALYSIS 5. FRAMEWORK FOR FOODBORNE AMR RISK ANALYSIS 6. PRELIMINARY FOODBORNE AMR RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 6.1. Identification of an AMR food safety issue 6.2. Development of a foodborne AMR risk profile 6.3. Ranking of the food safety issues and setting priorities for risk assessment and management 6.4. Establishment of preliminary risk management goals 6.5. Establishment of a risk assessment policy 6.6. Commission a foodborne AMR risk assessment 7. FOODBORNE AMR RISK ASSESSMENT 7.1. Sources of information 7.2. Process of foodborne AMR risk assessment 7.3. Hazard identification 7.4. Exposure assessment 7.5. Hazard characterization 7.6. Risk characterization 8. FOODBORNE AMR RISK MANAGEMENT 8.1. Consideration of the foodborne AMR risk assessment results 8.2. Identification of foodborne AMR RMOs 8.3 Evaluation of foodborne AMR RMOs 8.4. Selection of foodborne AMR RMOs 8.5. Implementation of foodborne AMR risk management decision(s) 8.6. Monitoring and review of foodborne AMR risk management measures 9. SURVEILLANCE OF USE OF ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS AND AMR MICROORGANISMS AND DETERMINANTS 10.FOODBORNE AMR RISK COMMUNICATION 10.1. Foodborne risk communication as a risk management tool Appendix 1. Elements for consideration in a foodborne AMR risk profile Appendix 2. Suggested elements for consideration in a foodborne AMR risk assessment Appendix 3. Examples of qualitative foodborne AMR risk assessment -- 2 of 28 -- CXG 77-2011 3 1. INTRODUCTION Antimicrobial resistance (AMR – also used for “antimicrobial resistant” in this document) is a major global public health concern and a food safety issue. When pathogens become resistant to antimicrobial agents they can pose a greater human health risk as a result of potential treatment failure, loss of treatment options and increased likelihood and severity of disease. Problems related to AMR are inherently related to antimicrobial use in any environment, including human and non-human uses. The use of antimicrobial agents in food-producing animals/crops provides a potentially important risk factor for selection and dissemination of AMR microorganisms and determinants from animals/food crops to humans via the consumption of food. In accordance with Codex principles, risk analysis is an essential tool in assessing the risk to human health from foodborne AMR microorganisms and determining appropriate risk management strategies to control those risks. Over the past decade, there have been significant developments with respect to the use of risk analysis approaches in addressing AMR. A series of FAO/OIE/WHO expert consultations on AMR have led to agreement that foodborne AMR microorganisms are potential microbiological food safety hazards. Consequently, the need for the development of a structured and coordinated approach for AMR risk analysis has been emphasized.1,2,3,4 WHO/FAO and OIE guidelines on risk analysis provide broad, structured approaches to address the potential public health impact of AMR microorganisms of animal/crop origin via food.5,6 However, a consolidated framework specific to foodborne AMR risk analysis was considered necessary, due to the biological complexity of AMR, the multidisciplinary aspects of AMR within the entire food production to consumption continuum and the need to identify appropriate risk management strategies. More specifically, these guidelines provide a structured risk analysis framework to address the risks to human health associated with the presence in food and animal feed, including aquaculture, and the transmission through food and animal feed, of AMR microorganisms or determinants linked to non-human use of antimicrobial agents. The initial part of the risk analysis framework consists of a group of tasks collectively referred to as “preliminary risk management activities”, which are carried out by the risk managers. This allows the risk manager to decide what action to take. This may involve the establishment of a risk assessment policy and the commissioning of a risk assessment or another appropriate action. If it is decided to commission a risk assessment, the preliminary risk management activities will provide some of the basic information required by risk assessors undertaking this task. The risk analysis framework includes the identification, evaluation, selection and implementation of appropriate risk management actions to, if necessary, minimize and contain the identified risk to human health. Risk managers are responsible for verifying that the risk management measures implemented are achieving the intended results, that unintended consequences associated with the measures are limited and that the risk management goals can be achieved. Good communication among risk assessors, managers and interested parties is essential for a transparent and informed risk analysis. These guidelines present components of foodborne AMR risk analysis in a chronological order of the risk analysis process. For better readability, the “Foodborne AMR risk communication” and “Surveillance of use of antimicrobial agents and AMR microorganisms and determinants” sections are placed at the end of the document, recognizing that the activities identified within these sections are applicable throughout the process. This document should be read in conjunction with the Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Food Safety for Application by Governments (CXG 62-2007), the Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CXG 30-1999), the Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CXG 63-2007), the Code of Practice to Minimize and Contain Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXC 61-2005), the Guidelines on Integrated Monitoring and Surveillance of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 94-2021), the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CXC 58-2005), the Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CXC 57-2004) and the Code of Hygienic Practice for Eggs and Eggs Products (CXC 15-1976). Risk analysis of AMR on animal feeds may also consider the Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CXC 54-2004), as well as Animal Feed Impact on Food Safety7 and the chapters related to the control of AMR in the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code.8 1 FAO/OIE/WHO. 2003. First Joint FAO/OIE/WHO Expert Workshop on Non-human Antimicrobial Usage and Antimicrobial Resistance: Scientific assessment, Geneva, Switzerland, 1–5 December 2003. 2 FAO/OIE/WHO. 2004. Second Joint FAO/OIE/WHO Expert Workshop on Non-Human Antimicrobial Usage and Antimicrobial Resistance: Management options, Oslo, Norway, 15–18 March 2004. 3 FAO/OIE/WHO. 2006. Joint FAO/OIE/WHO Expert Meeting on Antimicrobial Use in Aquaculture and Antimicrobial Resistance, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 13–16 June 2006 4 FAO/OIE/WHO. 2008. Joint FAO/WHO/OIE Expert Meeting on Critically Important Antimicrobials Report of the FAO/WHO/OIE Expert meeting, FAO, Rome, Italy, 26–30 November 2007, Appendix C Glossary 5 FAO/WHO. 2006. Food safety risk analysis: A guide for national safety authorities. (FAO Food and Nutrition Paper 87). 6 OIE. Terrestrial Animal Health Code (Section Veterinary Public Health). 7 FAO/WHO. 2008. Animal Feed Impact on Food Safety. Report of the FAO/WHO Expert Meeting FAO Headquarters, Rome 8-12 October 2007. 8 See note 6 above. -- 3 of 28 -- CXG 77-2011 4 2. SCOPE The scope of these guidelines is to provide science-based guidance on processes and methodology for risk analysis and its application to foodborne AMR related to non-human use of antimicrobial agents. The guidelines aim to assess the risk to human health associated with the presence in food and animal feed, including aquaculture, and the transmission through food and animal feed, of AMR microorganisms and determinants, to provide advice on appropriate risk management activities to reduce such risk. The guidelines will further address the risk associated with different sectors of antimicrobial agent use such as veterinary applications, plant protection or food processing. As there are existing Codex or internationally recognized guidelines, the following areas related to antimicrobial agents or AMR are outside the scope of this document: residues of antimicrobial agents in food; AMR marker genes in recombinant-DNA plants and recombinant-DNA microorganisms; 9 non-genetically modified microorganisms (for example, starter cultures) intentionally added to food with a technological purpose,10 and certain food ingredients, which could potentially carry AMR genes, such as probiotics.11 3. DEFINITIONS The following definitions are included to establish a common understanding of the terms used in this document. The definitions presented in the Codex Procedural Manual and the Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CXG 30-1999) are applicable to this document. Adverse health effect – An undesirable or unwanted outcome in humans. In this document, this refers to the human infections caused by AMR microorganisms and determinants in food or acquired from food of animal/crop origin as well as increased frequency of infections and treatment failures, loss of treatment options, and increased severity of infections manifested by prolonged duration of disease, increased hospitalization and mortality.12 Antimicrobial agent – Any substance of natural, semi-synthetic, or synthetic origin that at in vivo concentrations kills or inhibits the growth of microorganisms by interacting with a specific target.13 Antimicrobial class – Antimicrobial agents with related molecular structures, often with a similar mode of action because of interaction with a similar target and thus subject to similar mechanism of resistance. Variations in the properties of antimicrobial agents within a class often arise as a result of the presence of different molecular substitutions, which confer various intrinsic activities or various patterns of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) – The ability of a microorganism to multiply or persist in the presence of an increased level of an antimicrobial agent relative to the susceptible counterpart of the same species. Antimicrobial resistance determinant – The genetic element(s) encoding for the ability of microorganisms to withstand the effects of an antimicrobial agent. They are located either chromosomally or extra- chromosomally and may be associated with mobile genetic elements such as plasmids, integrons or transposons, thereby enabling horizontal transmission from resistant to susceptible strains. Commensal – Microorganisms participating in a symbiotic relationship in which one species derives some benefit while the other is unaffected. Generally, commensal microorganisms are considered to be non- pathogenic in their normal habitat but may, in certain circumstances, become opportunistic pathogens. Co-resistance – The ability of a microorganism to multiply or persist in the presence of different classes of antimicrobial agents due to possession of various resistance mechanisms. Cross-resistance – The ability of a microorganism to multiply or persist in the presence of other members of a particular class of antimicrobial agents or across different classes due to a shared mechanism of resistance. Extra- or off-label use – The use of an antimicrobial agent that is not in accordance with the approved product labelling. 9 The food safety assessment on the use of antimicrobial resistance marker genes in recombinant-DNA plants is addressed in the Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant-DNA Plants (CXG 45-2003). 10 The food safety assessment on the use of antimicrobial resistance marker genes in recombinant-DNA microorganisms is addressed in the Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods Produced Using Recombinant- DNA Microorganisms (CXG 46-2003). 11 The food safety assessment on the use of probiotics in foods is addressed in a Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Working Group on Drafting Guidelines for the Evaluation of Probiotics in Foods (FAO/WHO, 2002). 12 See note 1 on page 3. 13 See note 4 on page 3. -- 4 of 28 -- CXG 77-2011 5 Foodborne pathogen – A pathogen present in food, which may cause human disease(s) or illness through consumption of food contaminated with the pathogen and/or the biological products produced by the pathogen. Food-producing animals – Animals raised for the purpose of providing food to humans. Interpretive criteria – These are specific values such as minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) or inhibition zone diameters based on which bacteria can be assigned to categories of either ‘susceptible’, ‘intermediate’ or ‘resistant’. Pathogen – A microorganism that can cause infection, illness or disease. Risk management option (RMO) – A specific action that could be implemented to mitigate risk at various control points throughout the food production to consumption continuum. 4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR FOODBORNE AMR RISK ANALYSIS The Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Food Safety for Application by Governments (CXG 62-2007) shall apply to all aspects of foodborne AMR risk analysis. General principles specific to foodborne AMR risk analysis are as follows. Principle 1: Foodborne AMR risk analysis should consider the impact of foodborne AMR on human health as a result of non-human use of antimicrobial agents. Principle 2: Foodborne AMR risk analysis should consider the selection and dissemination of foodborne AMR through the food production to consumption continuum. Principle 3: Foodborne AMR risk analysis should consider relevant international documents (for example, recommendations of the “Joint FAO/WHO/OIE Expert Meeting on Critically Important Antimicrobials”) for setting priorities for risk assessment and / or risk management activities. Principle 4: Foodborne AMR risk analysis should consider national and regional differences in the use of antimicrobial agents, human exposure to and prevalence of foodborne AMR microorganisms and determinants, as well as available RMOs. Principle 5: Foodborne AMR risk analysis should build on Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CXG 30-1999) and Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (CXG 63-2007) and, in addition, needs to consider factors relating to the antimicrobial susceptibility of the microorganism(s) in question and related consequences to treatment of human disease resulting from exposure to AMR microorganisms. Principle 6: Foodborne AMR risk analysis should focus on clearly defined combinations of the food commodity, the AMR microorganism and determinants and the antimicrobial agent(s) t