GENERAL GUIDELINES ON SAMPLING CXG 50-2004 Adopted in 2004. Revised in 2023. -- 1 of 42 -- CXG 50-2004 2 1. REFERENCE GUIDELINES 1.1 Introduction These guidelines are primarily intended for use by Codex commodity committees responsible for developing acceptance sampling plans for provisions in Codex standards, and by governments responsible for import or export inspection of foods to describe the design and evaluation of sampling plans for the international trade of food commodities. Foods are frequently sampled throughout the food supply chain, from producers to consumers, for the purpose of checking their quality. Clear definition of sampling plans is an integral part of specifications for the sampling and testing of foods. Sampling plans are included in Codex standards and may be used by governments in standards for foods. Codex sampling plans, in conjunction with methods of analysis, are intended as a means of verifying that foods comply with provisions relating to composition, chemical or microbiological contaminants or pesticide residues contained in Codex standards. Sampling therefore plays an important role in achieving the Codex objectives of protecting consumers’ health and ensuring fair practices in the food trade. Codex sampling plans also have an important role in harmonizing technical approaches to sampling and by results of analysis interpretation in relation to lots or consignments of foods, in the light of the relevant provision(s) of the applicable Codex standard. It is important that sampling be undertaken in a way that contributes to these objectives. Specification of these quality objectives, the quality level acceptable to the customer, and the rate of acceptance of compliant products, enables the development of sampling plans. A Codex standard may set out a specific sampling plan for a particular context, or it may specify the outcome to be achieved by a sampling plan. Although these guidelines provide a generic approach to the design of sampling plans, Codex sampling plans are intended primarily for inspection of foods upon receipt, for example by importing country regulatory agencies, and might not be suitable for use by producers. However, a clear definition of quality objectives in Codex standards will allow producers to devise appropriate control and inspection procedures to achieve them. 1.2 Scope In these guidelines, the focus is on acceptance sampling plans for the inspection of isolated homogeneous lots, in which the risks to consumers and producers are controlled. Additionally, there are some guidelines for sampling inhomogeneous lots. The term ‘isolated’ means that the inspection of each lot is done in isolation, without considering the outcome of the inspection of adjacent lots or, for example, other lots from the same producer. This does not mean that information from previous inspections cannot be used; in particular, there are cases where the lot standard deviation may be known from the inspection of previous lots. The following situations are covered:  acceptance sampling plans for the control of the percentage nonconforming for homogeneous lots by attributes or by variables, for goods in bulk or individual items;  inspection by variables sampling plans for normally distributed characteristics;  adjustment for measurement uncertainty in cases where it is non-negligible as compared to the lot standard deviation with a focus on cases where the measurement uncertainty is normally distributed;  sampling plans for the control of the average content; and  in addition, some information is provided on issues involved with the design of plans for bulk materials. In Section 2, general concepts which are relevant for the sampling of foods are defined, Sections 3, 4 and 5 cover acceptance sampling plans for different situations of statistical food control. Section 6 covers other matters such as physical sampling and inhomogeneous lots. Appendix I contains a step-by-step guide for the selection of sampling plans. Appendix II contains tables of ISOi attributes and variables plans indexed by producer’s risk. [] i The International Organization for Standardization (ISO). -- 2 of 42 -- CXG 50-2004 3 These guidelines are not intended to be comprehensive; these guidelines do not provide information on all types of sampling plan options that may be available. Sampling plans from other sources, such as plans developed by other Codex committees, are still acceptable subject to their endorsement by the Codex Committee of Methods of Analysis and Sampling (CCMAS). 1.3 Definitions For the terms commonly used in these guidelines, the following definitions are provided, in addition to those in the Guidelines on Analytical Terminology (CXG 72-2009).1 Note: In some of the definitions, reference is made to the process standard deviation or the process quality level. In these guidelines, the focus lies on lots rather than processes. For this reason, the relevant quantities in these guidelines are the lot standard deviation and the lot quality level. Acceptance criterion Acceptance criterion is used to cover terms such as acceptance and rejection numbers for attributes plans and acceptability constants for variables plans. Note: In these guidelines, the term ‘acceptance criterion’ is used to describe the rule which is applied to the test results obtained during the lot inspection in the decision whether to accept the lot. Acceptance sampling Sampling after which decisions are made to accept a lot, or other grouping of products, materials or services, based on sample results. Acceptance sampling by attributes Acceptance sampling inspection whereby the presence or absence of one or more specified characteristics of each item in a sample is observed to establish statistically the acceptability of a lot or process. Acceptance sampling by variables Acceptance sampling inspection in which the acceptability of a process is determined statistically from measurements on specified quality characteristics of each item in a sample from a lot. Acceptance sampling plan Plan which states the sample size(s) to be used and the associated criteria for lot acceptance. Conformity assessment Activity to determine whether specified requirements relating to a product, process, system or person or body are fulfilled. Consignment A quantity of some commodity delivered at one time. It may consist of either a portion of a lot, or a set of several lots. However, in the case of statistical inspection, the consignment shall be considered as a new lot for the interpretation of the results.  If a consignment is a portion of a lot, the consignment shall be considered as a lot for the inspection.  If the consignment is a set of several lots, before any inspection, care shall be given to the homogeneity of the consignment. If not homogeneous, a stratified sample may be used. Consumer and producer The terms ‘consumer’ and ‘producer’ are conventional and may apply to a range of different operators in the food supply chain, such as a grower, manufacturer, the manufacturer’s own quality control system, supplier, exporting country, processor, on-seller, or importing country. In general, ‘producer’ refers to a supplier or seller of foodstuffs and ‘consumer’ to an importing country regulator, a purchaser, or an actual consumer of those foods. -- 3 of 42 -- CXG 50-2004 4 Consumer’s risk (CR) Probability of acceptance when the quality level of the process has a value stated by the acceptance sampling plan as unsatisfactory. Consumer's risk quality (CRQ) Quality level of a lot or process which, in the acceptance sampling plan, corresponds to a specified CR. Note: The CRQ corresponds to the limiting quality level (LQL) in the ISO 2859ii and ISO 3951iii standards. Indifference quality level Quality level which, in the acceptance sampling plan, corresponds to a probability of acceptance of 0.5, when a continuing series of lots is considered. Laboratory sample A sample as prepared (from the lot) for sending to the laboratory and intended for inspection or testing. Lot A quantity of product produced under conditions presumed uniform. Operating characteristic curve Curve showing the relationship between probability of acceptance of product and the incoming quality level for given acceptance sampling plan. Plan Refer acceptance sampling plan. Producer's risk (PR) Probability of non-acceptance when the quality level of the process has a value stated by the plan as acceptable. Producer's risk quality (PRQ) Quality level of a lot or process which, in the acceptance sampling plan, corresponds to a specified PR. Note: The PRQ corresponds to the acceptance quality limit (AQL) in the ISO 2859iv and ISO 3951v standards. Quality level Quality expressed as a rate of nonconforming units or rate of number of nonconformities. Note: In these guidelines, the quality level of a given lot is often expressed in terms of the percentage of nonconforming items. Sample One or more items taken from a population and intended to provide information on the population, and possibly serve as a basis for a decision on the population or on the process which had produced it. Sampling plan Refer acceptance sampling plan 2. ACCEPTANCE SAMPLING – GENERAL PRINCIPLES 2.1 Reasons for sampling While various measures such as hazard analysis and critical control point systems (HACCP), good manufacturing practice (GMP), process control and sampling are available to producers to provide assurance about the quality of products they supply, consumers usually rely on acceptance sampling if they wish to verify the quality of incoming products. [] ii ISO 2859: Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes. This ISO includes a series of standards (parts). iii ISO 3951: Sampling procedures for inspection by variables. This ISO includes a series of standards (parts). iv See note ii above. v See note iii above. -- 4 of 42 -- CXG 50-2004 5 Acceptance sampling procedures are used when goods are transferred between two parties. The purpose of these procedures is to provide unambiguous rules for releasing a product after inspection of only a limited sample. Both parties should be fully aware of the limitations and risks associated with using such procedures and therefore most acceptance sampling procedures should include provisions for dealing with disputes and non-conforming items found in lots that have been accepted by the sampling plan. An acceptance sampling plan specifies the number of items to be taken and how they are to be taken, the acceptance criterion used to decide whether a lot should be accepted and how to take non-negligible measurement uncertainty into account. In general acceptance sampling is used to:  reduce costs;  allow product assessment when tests are destructive; and  enable faster decision-making. 2.2 Approaches to acceptance sampling There are three possible approaches to acceptance sampling: (a) 100 percent inspection, involving inspection of the entire (i.e. 100 percent) lot; (b) sampling based on statistical principles; and (c) ad hoc inspection, i.e. sampling plans without a statistical basis. The risks and costs associated with each of these three options will be briefly discussed. Approach (a) is usually not feasible due to the prohibitive cost of testing and in addition, there might not be any product left to sell if the inspection method necessitates destructive testing. Approach (b) has the disadvantage of higher risks as compared to approach (a), since a part of the lot is not inspected. However, by applying an approach based on statistical principles, the risks can be calculated, and a sampling plan can be chosen that ensures these risks are controlled to desired levels. It also has the advantage of practicability and lower costs. In lot inspections, there are two types of risks:  acceptance of a lot of unsatisfactory quality (CR); and  rejection of a lot of acceptable quality (PR). Sampling plans should be designed to control these risks to suitable levels, whereby suitable risk levels are determined based on fitness-for-purpose considerations. Approach (c) is not recommended. It may be used for practical reasons, such as limited resources, or for simplicity. However, such plans might not provide the expected level of assurance of food quality and may inadvertently impose high costs, for instance through unwarranted acceptance of food that could lead to illness or unjustified rejection that, in turn, could lead to the imposition of fines, penalties or trade sanctions. The risks associated with such plans should be evaluated where possible. Decisions on acceptance or rejection should not be made solely based on these plans except by mutual agreement of the consumer and producer with an understanding of the risks involved. In summary, approach (b) allows for practicability while ensuring that risks are controlled to levels considered appropriate based on fitness-for-purpose considerations. -- 5 of 42 -- CXG 50-2004 6 2.2.1 Acceptance sampling versus conformity assessment Acceptance sampling and conformity assessment do not have the same purpose. Conformity assessment is the use of a single measurement result to decide whether a single item conforms to a limit. Acceptance sampling is the process in which a samplevi is taken from a lot and involves the determination of acceptance criteria and sample size to decide whether a lot is accepted or rejected. The broadest definition of conformity assessment may be considered to include acceptance sampling. However, in a narrower sense, conformity assessment can be understood to refer specifically to the situation where a one single measurement result is used to decide if one single item of interest conforms to a specified requirement. If conformity assessment is understood in this narrower sense, then it is important to distinguish conformity assessment and acceptance sampling. In this section, conformity assessment will be understood in the narrower sense. Although acceptance sampling and conformity assessment involve similar procedures, and although consumer and producer risks are defined for both, they are performed in different contexts and follow different objectives. Conformity assessment In conformity assessment, conformity is assessed via the application of a decision rule which accounts for measurement uncertainty. Depending on the measurand, the measurement uncertainty may or may not include uncertainty from sampling. Depending on the decision rule, there may be cases where the assessment is inconclusive. Acceptance sampling In acceptance sampling, at least one measurement result (typically more than one) is used to decide whether to accept or reject a lot under inspection. The acceptance sampling plan consists in both requirements regarding the sampling procedure (e.g. the number of items to be taken from the lot) and an acceptance criterion. The acceptance sampling plan is determined in such a way as to en