GUIDELINES ON THE APPLICATION OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF FOOD HYGIENE TO THE CONTROL OF VIRUSES IN FOOD CAC/GL 79-2012 INTRODUCTION 1. In recent years, viruses have been increasingly recognized as important causes of foodborne diseases. Viruses are microorganisms that differ in size, structure and biological characteristics from bacteria. Viruses are strictly host-dependent for their replication and have their own typical host range and cell preference (tropism). Viruses can be transmitted in different ways, e.g., via the respiratory or faecal-oral routes. Human viruses can be transmitted directly from person-to person, but also indirectly via virus-contaminated water, air, soil, surfaces or food. Some viruses (zoonotic viruses) are transmitted from animals to humans. Data from recent studies have shown that foodborne viral infections are very common in many parts of the world, despite the measures already in place mainly targeted at reducing bacterial contamination. 2. The human enteric viruses most frequently reported as involved in foodborne outbreaks are norovirus (NoV) and hepatitis A virus (HAV). Other viruses such as rotavirus, hepatitis E virus (HEV), astrovirus, Aichi virus, sapovirus, enterovirus, coronavirus, parvovirus and adenovirus can also be transmitted by food, and anecdotal evidence suggests the list of foodborne viruses may be even longer. Based on the symptoms of disease, these viruses can be grouped into those that cause gastroenteritis (e.g., NoV), enterically transmitted hepatitis (e.g., HAV, that replicates in the liver), and a third group which replicates in the human intestine, but only causes illness after they migrate to other organs such as the central nervous system (e.g., enterovirus). The major foodborne viruses are those that infect via the gastrointestinal tract and are excreted in faeces and/or vomit, and are infectious for humans when ingested via the oral route. Asymptomatic infections and shedding are common and have to be considered in food production. 3. Noteworthy aspects of foodborne viruses and the associated infections/illnesses that determine management strategies to be different from management strategies for bacterial pathogens: • Viruses need to enter living host cells in order to be able to multiply (replicate). Unlike bacteria, they do not replicate in food. Consequently, viruses do not cause deterioration of the product and the organoleptic properties of the food are not affected due to viral contamination. • Even though high numbers of viral particles are shed in the stools of symptomatic or asymptomatic infected persons (e.g., exceeding 106 particles per gram of stool) or in vomit, only a few viral/infectious particles (less than 100) are needed to cause infection that may lead to illness. • Human enteric viruses, such as NoV and HAV, are very infectious and person-to-person spread is the most common transmission route. Secondary spread of these viruses after primary introduction by, for example, food-related contamination, is common and often results in larger, prolonged outbreaks. • Non-enveloped viruses, such as NoV and HAV, are covered in a protein-based structure called a capsid. Enveloped viruses, such as influenza, have a capsid and are further coated in a biological membrane derived from the host cell. Both the capsid and envelope structures influence environmental persistence and resistance to cleaning and disinfection interventions. However, t he non-enveloped viruses tend to be more resistant to inactivation from solvents (e.g., chloroform) and desiccation. • Viruses transmitted by the faecal-oral route can persist for months in foodstuffs or in the environment (e.g., in soil, water, sediments, bivalve molluscs or on various inanimate surfaces). Most foodborne viruses are more resistant than bacteria to commonly used control measures, (e.g., refrigeration, freezing, pH, drying, UV radiation, heat, pressure, disinfection, etc.). • Freezing and refrigeration temperatures preserve viruses and are believed to be important factors that increase the persistence of foodborne viruses in the environment. Heat and drying can be used to inactivate viruses, but there are virus-to-virus differences in resistance to these processes. The presence of organic matter, such as faecal material and the food matrix can influence relative resistance to heat and drying. • Traditional hand washing practices may be more effective for infectious virus reduction as compared to the use of hand sanitizing-agents. The majority of chemical disinfectants used in food establishments do not effectively inactivate non-enveloped viruses, such as NoV or HAV. • Zoonotic foodborne transmission of viruses is not commonly reported as is the case for many bacterial pathogens, such as Salmonella and Campylobacter, however, it does occur, e.g., for HEV. • In general, testing of foods for foodborne viruses is challenging and requires matrix-dependent extraction and concentration techniques and is based on detection of viral nucleic acids. • There is a current lack of methods for assessing the level of inactivation of foodborne viruses in food. This has led to the use of surrogate viruses, e.g., the use of feline calicivirus and murine norovirus in place of NoV. When evaluating risk management options, the use of a surrogate will not always mimic the resistance of the intended foodborne viruses. 4. During the FAO/WHO Expert meeting on “Viruses in Food” 1, NoV and HAV were determined to be the viruses of greatest concern from a food safety perspective based on the incidence of reported foodborne disease, the severity of disease, including mortality, and their potential for transmission via foods. Estimates of the proportion of viral illness attributed to food are in the range 1 FAO/WHO [Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health Organization]. 2008. Viruses in Food: Scientific advice to support risk management activities: meeting report. Microbiological Risk Assessment Series. No. 13. -- 1 of 13 -- CAC/GL 79-2012 2 of around 5% for HAV and 12-47% for NoV1. Data from at least 4 continents show that this is a major public health issue worldwide, although data from many countries are sparse. HAV and rotavirus were identified as the major foodborne viruses that cause sev ere disease and significant mortality. The primary mode of transmission for rotavirus is person-to-person spread, but in areas with poor hygienic situations waterborne and foodborne spread may play a role. Like HAV and NoV, HEV is transmitted by the faecal-oral route. HEV has been found to be responsible for sporadic and epidemic acute hepatitis, especially in some areas. HEV infection is usually associated with contaminated drinking water, but has also been linked to eating raw deer meat, undercooked pork liver or wild boar meat. 5. NoV: Norovirus, formerly Norwalk-like virus, infections occur year-round, and cause gastro-enteritis in people of all ages. Overall, illness is relatively mild, but can be more severe and may result in death in high-risk groups such as the elderly or people with underlying disease. The greatest public health impact from NoV outbreaks has been reported in institutions such as hospitals and nursing homes, where NoV outbreaks commonly occur due to the close proximity of patients in an enclosed environment. Clear wintertime peaks in incidence have been observed when looking at reported outbreaks, but other than in the case of bivalve molluscs these are particularly associated with infections spread through person-to person contact or contaminated environmental surfaces (e.g., outbreaks in healthcare facilities) rather than foodborne infections. The incubation period is 12-72 hours; in most cases symptoms appear between 24-30 hours. The onset of symptoms after NoV infection is often characterised by sudden onset of one or several episodes of projectile vomiting and/or by one to several days with diarrhoea. NoV-infected persons shed large amounts of infectious virus particles (106-1010 particles/g) in their stool while having symptoms, but this may also occur before the onset of symptoms, and shedding may continue on average for 2 or more weeks after resolution of symptoms even in immuno- competent persons. The disease and shedding period may be longer in the case of immuno-suppressed individuals. Some NoV infections occur without resulting in apparent symptoms. A vaccine against NoV is not available at present. 6. HAV: Hepatitis A virus is a cause of acute viral hepatitis. The incidence of HAV infection varies considerably among and within countries. In countries where HAV infection is highly endemic, the majority of people are infected in early childhood, when the infection is asymptomatic in over 90% of children under 5 years of age. Virtually all adults in these areas are immune. In countries, where HAV infections are less common as a result of increased standards of public health such as access to safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, very few persons are infected in early childhood, and the majority of adults remain susceptible to infection by HAV. Later in life (persons over 40 years), HAV infection is symptomatic in over 80% of the infected persons and may result in a more severe disease outcome. As a result, the potential risk of outbreaks of hepatitis A is increased in these regions. The incubation period for HAV is at least 2 weeks, to a maximum of 6 weeks, with an average of 28 days. The peak infectivity occurs in the 2 weeks preceding the onset of jaundice, i.e., the presence of yellow colouring of the skin and/or mucous membranes. The virus is shed in large numbers (106-108 particles/g) in faeces from the final 2 weeks of the incubation period up to 5 weeks into the symptomatic phase. In HAV endemic areas, children may be an important risk factor in the spread of HAV during primary production or food preparation activities. Some HAV infections occur without symptoms. Vaccines against HAV are available. 7. During the FAO/WHO Expert meeting on “Viruses in Food”1, three major sources of viral contamination of foods were identified: 1) human sewage/faeces, 2) infected food handlers and 3) animals harbouring zoonotic viruses, although combinations of these have also been described. The virus-commodity combinations of greatest public health concern selected were NoV and HAV in prepared (ready-to-eat) foods, bivalve molluscs, and fresh produce. 8. There are currently no effective, realistic and validated risk management options to eliminate viral contamination of both bivalve molluscs and fresh produce prior to consumption without changing the normally desired characteristics of the food. Because of concerns about virus persistence during food processing, effective control strategies need to focus on prevention of contamination. Such prevention will have to occur primarily at the pre-harvest level for some products (bivalve molluscs, fresh produce for raw consumption), at the harvest level (fresh fruits and vegetables) and at the post-harvest phase for others (prepared, ready-to-eat foods). 9. Evidence of viral contamination is primarily based on the detection of viral RNA/DNA since many foodborne viruses cannot be reliably cultured in vitro. Quantitative and semi-quantitative real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (real time RT- PCR) methods have been developed for various food/virus combinations that are sensitive and specific. Detection of viral RNA/DNA does not discriminate between infectious and non-infectious virus particles and test results are subject to variability depending on the food product, the distribution of virus within the food matrix and the presence of PCR inhibitors. Importantly, there is a degree of uncertainty as to how the lower limits of detection relate to product safety. Molecular technologies should be fully validated and the intended use and interpretation clearly defined. Ideally, the testing laboratory should be accredited. SECTION 1 - OBJECTIVES 10. The primary purpose of these guidelines is to give guidance on how to prevent or minimize the presence of human enteric viruses in foods, and more specifically of NoV and HAV in foods. The guidelines provide advice to governments on a framework for the control of human enteric viruses in food, especially NoV and HAV, with a view towards protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in food trade. The guidelines also provide information that will be of interest to the food industry, consumers and other interested parties. Information provided in these guidelines may also assist in minimizing the risks of foodborne i llness from new and emerging viruses in foods. SECTION 2 - SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITION 2.1 SCOPE 2.1.1 Food chain 11. These guidelines are applicable to all foods, with a focus on ready-to-eat food, from primary production through to consumption, for the control of human enteric viruses, in particular NoV and HAV, in foods. They should complement controls in place for any other pathogens. -- 2 of 13 -- CAC/GL 79-2012 3 2.2 USE 12. These guidelines follow the format of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969)2 and should be used in conjunction with it and other relevant Codes of Practice, such as the Code of Hygienic Practice for Precooked and Cooked Foods in Mass Catering (CAC/RCP 39-1993), the Code of Practice for Fish and Fishery Products (CAC/RCP 52-2003) and the Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 53-2003). The annex on the Control of Hepatitis A Virus (HAV) and Norovirus (NoV) in Bivalve Molluscs (Annex I) and the annex on the Control of Hepatitis A Virus (HAV) and Norovirus (NoV) in Fresh Produce (Annex II) are supplements to these guidelines and provide additional recommendations for these specific virus- commodity combinations. 2.3 DEFINITIONS Human enteric virus – a virus that replicates in the gastro-intestinal tract or in the liver and is excreted in faeces and/or vomitus from humans. It is transmitted mainly by the faecal-oral route and is infectious to humans. Fresh produce – fresh fruit and vegetables grown in the field (with or without cover) or in protected facilities (hydroponic systems or greenhouses). Ready-to-eat food (RTE-food) - any food that is normally eaten in its raw state or any food handled, processed, mixed, cooked, or otherwise prepared into a form, that is normally eaten without further steps, which could remove viruses or eliminate their infectivity. Clean water - water that does not compromise food safety in the circumstances of its use. SECTION 3 - PRIMARY PRODUCTION/HARVESTING AREA OBJECTIVES: To describe the setting in which the primary production occurs and to identify different aspects of production processes that should be controlled to reduce the chance of viral contamination of food. RATIONALE: Food may become contaminated at the primary production area by water, so