PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR THE CONDUCT OF MICROBIOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT CAC/GL 30-1999 Adopted 1999. Amendments 2012, 2014. -- 1 of 7 -- CAC/GL 30-1999 2 1. INTRODUCTION 2. SCOPE 3. DEFINITIONS 4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MICROBIOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT 5. GUIDELINES FOR APPLICATION 5.1 General Considerations 5.2 Statement of Purpose of Risk Assessment 5.3 Hazard Identification 5.4 Exposure Assessment 5.5 Hazard Characterization 5.6 Risk Characterization 5.7 Documentation 5.8 Reassessment -- 2 of 7 -- CAC/GL 30-1999 1 1. INTRODUCTION Risks from microbiological hazards are of immediate and serious concern to human health. Microbiological Risk Analysis is a process consisting of three components: Risk Assessment, Risk Management, and Risk Communication, which has the overall objective to ensure public health protection. This document deals with Risk Assessment which is a key element in assuring that sound science is used to establish standards, guidelines and other recommendations for food safety to enhance consumer protection and facilitate international trade. The Microbiological Risk Assessment process should include quantitative information to the greatest extent possible in the estimation of risk. A Microbiological Risk Assessment should be conducted using a structured approach such as that described in this document. This document will be of primary interest to governments although other organizations, companies, and other interested parties who need to prepare a Microbiological Risk Assessment will find it valuable. Since Microbiological Risk Assessment is a developing science, implementation of these guidelines may require a period of time and may also require specialized training in the countries that consider it necessary. This may be particularly the case for developing countries. Although Microbiological Risk Assessment is the primary focus of this document, the method can also be applied to certain other classes of biological hazards. 2. SCOPE The scope of this document applies to Risk Assessment of microbiological hazards in food1. 3. DEFINITIONS The definitions cited here are to facilitate the understanding of certain words or phrases used in this document. Dose-Response Assessment - The determination of the relationship between the magnitude of exposure (dose) to a chemical, biological or physical agent and the severity and/or frequency of associated adverse health effects (response). Exposure Assessment - The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation of the likely intake of biological, chemical, and physical agents via food as well as exposures from other sources if relevant. Hazard - A biological, chemical or physical agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an adverse health effect. Hazard Characterization - The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation of the nature of the adverse health effects associated with biological, chemical and physical agents, which may be present in food. Hazard Identification - The identification of biological, chemical, and physical agents capable of causing adverse health effects and which may be present in a particular food or group of foods. Quantitative Risk Assessment - A Risk Assessment that provides numerical expressions of risk and indication of the attendant uncertainties (stated in the 1995 Expert Consultation definition on Risk Analysis). Qualitative Risk Assessment - A Risk Assessment based on data which, while forming an inadequate basis for numerical risk estimations, nonetheless, when conditioned by prior expert knowledge and identification of attendant uncertainties permits risk ranking or separation into descriptive categories of risk. Risk - A function of the probability of an adverse health effect and the severity of that effect, consequential to a hazard(s) in food. Risk Analysis - A process consisting of three components: risk assessment, risk management and risk communication. Risk Assessment - A scientifically based process consisting of the following steps: (i) hazard identification, (ii) hazard characterization, (iii) exposure assessment, and (iv) risk characterization. Risk Characterization - The process of determining the qualitative and/or quantitative estimation, including attendant uncertainties, of the probability of occurrence and severity of known or potential adverse health effects in a given population based on hazard identification, hazard characterization and exposure assessment. 1 These principles for risk assessment also apply to feed and feed ingredients for food-producing animals in cases where it could impact food safety -- 3 of 7 -- CAC/GL 30-1999 2 Risk Communication - The interactive exchange of information and opinions throughout the risk analysis process concerning risk, risk-related factors and risk perceptions, among risk assessors, risk managers, consumers, industry, the academic community and other interested parties, including the explanation of risk assessment findings and the basis of risk management decisions. Risk Estimate - The qualitative and/or quantitative estimation of risk resulting from risk characterization. Risk Management - The process, distinct from risk assessment of weighing policy alternatives, in consultation with all interested parties, considering risk assessment and other factors relevant for the health protection of consumers and for the promotion of fair trade practices, and, if needed, selecting appropriate prevention and control options. Sensitivity analysis - A method used to examine the behaviour of a model by measuring the variation in its outputs resulting from changes to its inputs. Transparent - Characteristics of a process where the rationale, the logic of development, constraints, assumptions, value judgements, decisions, limitations and uncertainties of the expressed determination are fully and systematically stated, documented, and accessible for review. Uncertainty analysis - A method used to estimate the uncertainty associated with model inputs, assumptions and structure/form. 4. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MICROBIOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT Microbiological Risk Assessment should be soundly based upon science. There should be a functional separation between Risk Assessment and Risk Management. Microbiological Risk Assessment should be conducted according to a structured approach that includes Hazard Identification, Hazard Characterization, Exposure Assessment, and Risk Characterization. A Microbiological Risk Assessment should clearly state the purpose of the exercise, including the form of Risk Estimate that will be the output. The conduct of a Microbiological Risk Assessment should be transparent. Any constraints that impact on the Risk Assessment such as cost, resources or time, should be identified and their possible consequences described. The Risk Estimate should contain a description of uncertainty and where the uncertainty arose during the Risk Assessment process. Data should be such that uncertainty in the Risk Estimate can be determined; data and data collection systems should, as far as possible, be of sufficient quality and precision that uncertainty in the Risk Estimate is minimized. A Microbiological Risk Assessment should explicitly consider the dynamics of microbiological growth, survival, and death in foods and the complexity of the interaction (including sequelae) between human and agent following consumption as well as the potential for further spread. Wherever possible, Risk Estimates should be reassessed over time by comparison with independent human illness data. A Microbiological Risk Assessment may need reevaluation, as new relevant information becomes available. 5. GUIDELINES FOR APPLICATION These Guidelines provide an outline of the elements of a Microbiological Risk Assessment indicating the types of decisions that need to be considered at each step. 5.1 General Considerations The elements of Risk Analysis are: Risk Assessment, Risk Management, and Risk Communication. The functional separation of Risk Assessment from Risk Management helps assure that the Risk Assessment process is unbiased. However, certain interactions are needed for a comprehensive and systematic Risk Assessment process. These may include ranking of hazards and risk assessment policy decisions. Where Risk Management issues are taken into account in Risk Assessment, the decision-making process should be transparent. It is the transparent unbiased nature of the process that is important, not who is the assessor or who is the manager. -- 4 of 7 -- CAC/GL 30-1999 3 Whenever practical, efforts should be made to provide a Risk Assessment process that allows contributions by interested parties. Contributions by interested parties in the Risk Assessment process can improve the transparency of the Risk Assessment, increase the quality of Risk Assessments through additional expertise and information, and facilitate risk communication by increasing the credibility and acceptance of the results of the Risk Assessment. Scientific evidence may be limited, incomplete or conflicting. In such cases, transparent informed decisions will have to be made on how to complete the Risk Assessment process. The importance of using high quality information when conducting a Risk Assessment is to reduce uncertainty and to increase the reliability of the Risk Estimate. The use of quantitative information is encouraged to the extent possible, but the value and utility of qualitative information should not be discounted. It should be recognized that sufficient resources will not always be available and constraints are likely to be imposed on the Risk Assessment that will influence the quality of the Risk Estimate. Where such resource constraints apply, it is important for transparency purposes that these constraints be described in the formal record. Where appropriate, the record should include an evaluation of the impact of the resource constraints on the Risk Assessment. 5.2 Statement of Purpose of Risk Assessment At the beginning of the work the specific purpose of the particular Risk Assessment being carried out should be clearly stated. The output form and possible output alternatives of the Risk Assessment should be defined. Output might, for example, take the form of an estimate of the prevalence of illness, or an estimate of annual rate (incidence of human illness per 100,000) or an estimate of the rate of human illness and severity per eating occurrence. The microbiological risk assessment may require a preliminary investigation phase. In this phase, evidence to support farm-to-table modelling of risk might be structured or mapped into the framework of risk assessment. 5.3 Hazard Identification For microbial agents, the purpose of hazard identification is to identify the microorganisms or the microbial toxins of concern with food. Hazard identification will predominately be a qualitative process. Hazards can be identified from relevant data sources. Information on hazards can be obtained from scientific literature, from databases such as those in the food industry, government agencies, and relevant international organizations and through solicitation of opinions of experts. Relevant information includes data in areas such as: clinical studies, epidemiological studies and surveillance, laboratory animal studies, investigations of the characteristics of microorganisms, the interaction between microorganisms and their environment through the food chain from primary production up to and including consumption, and studies on analogous microorganisms and situations. 5.4 Exposure Assessment Exposure Assessment includes an assessment of the extent of actual or anticipated human exposure. For microbiological agents, Exposure Assessments might be based on the potential extent of food contamination by a particular agent or its toxins, and on dietary information. Exposure assessment should specify the unit of food that is of interest, i.e., the portion size in most/all cases of acute illness. Factors that must be considered for Exposure Assessment include the frequency of contamination of foods by the pathogenic agent and its level in those foods over time. For example, these factors are influenced by the characteristics of the pathogenic agent, the microbiological ecology of the food, the initial contamination of the raw material including considerations of regional differences and seasonality of production, the level of sanitation and process controls, the methods of processing, packaging, distribution and storage of the foods, as well as any preparation steps such as cooking and holding. Another factor that must be considered in the assessment is patterns of consumption. This relates to socio-economic and cultural backgrounds, ethnicity, seasonality, age differences (population demographics), regional differences, and consumer preferences and behaviour. Other factors to be considered include: the role of the food handler as a source of contamination, the amount of hand contact with the product, and the potential impact of abusive environmental time/temperature relationships. -- 5 of 7 -- CAC/GL 30-1999 4 Microbial pathogen levels can be dynamic and while they may be kept low, for example, by proper time/temperature controls during food processing, they can substantially increase with abuse conditions (for example, improper food storage temperatures or cross contamination from other foods). Therefore, the Exposure Assessment should describe the pathway from production to consumption. Scenarios can be constructed to predict the range of possible exposures. The scenarios might reflect effects of processing, such as hygienic design, cleaning and disinfection, as well as the time/temperature and other conditions of the food history, food handling and consumption patterns, regulatory controls, and surveillance systems. Exposure Assessment estimates the level, within various levels of uncertainty, of microbiological pathogens or microbiological toxins, and the likelihood of their occurrence in foods at the time of consumption. Qualitatively foods can be categorized according to the likelihood that the foodstuff will or will not be contaminated at its source; whether or not the food can support the growth of the pathogen of concern; whether there is substantial potential for abusive handling of the food; or whether the food will be subjected to a heat process. The presence, growth, survival, or death of microorganisms, including pathogens in foods, are influenced by processing and packaging, the storage environment, including the temperature of storage, the relative humidity of the environment, and the gaseous composition of the atmosphere. Other relevant factors include pH, moisture content or water activity (aw), nutrient content, the presence of antimicrobial substances, and competing microflora. Predictive microbiology can be a useful tool in an Exposure Assessment. 5.5 Hazard Characterization This step