GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN, PRODUCTION, ISSUANCE AND USE OF GENERIC OFFICIAL CERTIFICATES CXG 38-20011 Adopted in 2001. Revised in 2005, 2007, 2009, 2021. Formerly Guidelines for generic official certificate formats and the production and issuance of certificates. 1 These guidelines should be read in conjunction with the Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment, and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CXG 26-1997), particularly Section 7, certification systems. Reference should also be made to Codex-developed model certificates. -- 1 of 16 -- CXG 38-2001 2 SECTION 1 – PREAMBLE 1. These guidelines recognize that the importing country’s competent authority may, as a condition for clearance of food presented for international trade, require official certificates issued by or with the authority of the exporting country’s competent authority. 2. These guidelines are not intended to encourage or mandate the use of official certificates for food presented for international trade or to diminish the trade facilitating role of commercial or other types of certificates, including third party certificates that are not issued by, or with the authority of, the government of the exporting country. 3. These guidelines recognize that while official certificates may help importing countries to achieve their objectives relating to food safety and ensuring fair practices in the food trade there may also be other approaches, which can complement or substitute for official certificates, e.g. establishment listing. SECTION 2 – SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES 4. These guidelines provide guidance to countries on the design, production, issuance and use of official certificates to attest that food presented for international trade has met the importing country requirements relating to food safety, and/or ensuring fair practices in the food trade. 5. These guidelines provide assistance in identifying the information and attestations that can be provided by competent authorities. 6. These guidelines are equally applicable to official certificates regardless of the mode of transmission, e.g. paper or electronic. 7. These guidelines do not deal with matters of animal and plant health unless directly related to food safety. However, it is recognized that, in practice, a single official certificate may contain information relevant to several matters (e.g. food safety and animal and plant health). SECTION 3 – DEFINITIONS Certificates are those signed (manually or electronically) paper or electronic documents, which describe and attest to attributes of consignments of food destined for international trade. Certification is the procedure by which official certification bodies or officially recognized certification bodies provide written or equivalent assurance that food or food control systems conform to requirements. Certification of food may be, as appropriate, based on a range of inspection activities which may include continuous online inspection, auditing of quality assurance systems, and examination of finished products.2 Official certificates are certificates issued by, or under the control of the exporting country’s competent authority, including by a certifying body recognized by the competent authority to issue such certificates. Certifying bodies are official certification bodies and officially recognized certification bodies.3 Certifying officers are officers authorized or recognized, by the exporting country’s competent authority, to complete and issue official certificates. Electronic signature means data in electronic form in, affixed to or logically associated with, the official certificate, which may be used to identify the certifying officer and to indicate the signatory’s confirmation of the information contained in the official certificate.4 Consignment means a defined collection of food products normally covered by a single certificate. Paperless exchange of official certificates is the act of competent authorities or certifying bodies providing, receiving and archiving the identified information and relevant attestations required by the importing country in electronic form. Single window is a facility providing trade facilitation that allows parties involved in trade and transport to lodge standardized information and documents with a single entry point to fulfil all import, export, and transit-related regulatory requirements.5 Individual data elements should only be submitted once electronically. 2 Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CXG 20-1995). 3 Recognition of certification bodies is addressed under Section 8 – Official Accreditation of the Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CXG 26- 1997). 4 Definition of electronic signature has been adapted from UNCITRAL guidance. 5 See, the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Recommendation on Establishing a Single Window (Recommendation 33, ECE/TRADE/352), Article 10 (4) of the World Trade Organization’s Trade Facilitation Agreement and WCO Single Window Compendium. -- 2 of 16 -- CXG 38-2001 3 SECTION 4 – PRINCIPLES 8. The following principles apply to the design, production, issuance and use of official certificates. A. Official certificates should be required only where attestations and essential information are necessary to ensure that food safety and/or fair practices in the food trade requirements are met. B. Exporting countries may provide assurances through means other than consignment-by-consignment certificates, as appropriate. C. Attestations and information required by the importing country should be confined to essential information that is related to the objectives of the importing country’s food inspection and certification system. D. The rationale and requirements for specific attestations and identifying information should be communicated to exporting countries in a consistent and transparent manner and be applied by the importing country in a non-discriminatory manner. E. Official certificates regardless of their mode of transmission and their contents, should present information in a form that simplifies and expedites the clearance process while meeting the importing country requirements. F. The competent authority of the exporting country is ultimately responsible for any certificate it issues or authorizes to be issued. G. All relevant attestations and identifying information required by the importing country should be included on a single official certificate, where possible, to avoid multiple or redundant certificates. H. Competent authorities should take appropriate action to prevent the use of fraudulent certificates and should assist, as appropriate, in the timely investigation of such use. SECTION 5 – USE OF OFFICIAL CERTIFICATES Principle A Official certificates should be required only where attestations and essential information are necessary to ensure that food safety and/or fair practices in the food trade requirements are met. 9. Specific attestations and information related to the product identified in the certificate can provide assurances that the food or group of food products: – complies with the food safety requirements of the importing country; and – complies with requirements of the importing country related to fair practices in the food trade. 10. It may be the case that national legislation does not authorize an exporting country’s competent authority to issue the certificate required by the importing country. Such information should be communicated to the importing country. In such instances, the importing country should consider the need to provide flexibility to allow such assurances to be provided by alternative means so long as food safety and fair practices in food trade are assured. SECTION 6 – ALTERNATIVES TO THE USE OF OFFICIAL CERTIFICATES Principle B Exporting countries may provide assurances through means other than consignment- by-consignment certificates, as appropriate. 11. Alternative arrangements that provide equivalent assurances with respect to food safety or ensuring fair practices in the food trade should be considered. 12. In some circumstances, an importing country may agree to accept from an exporting country a listing of establishments that meet the specific requirements of the importing country. This listing may be used to accomplish the same objectives as consignment-by-consignment certificates, recognizing that the importing country may still need additional information (e.g. mode of transport) for each consignment. 13. The mechanisms and criteria for establishing, maintaining and reviewing such lists should be made transparent by the exporting country and agreed to by the importing country. 14. Recognizing that a consignment is normally covered by a single official certificate, it is also possible for certain certificates to apply to multiple consignments if agreed by the importing country. In such cases, multiple consignment certificates should have a fixed duration. -- 3 of 16 -- CXG 38-2001 4 SECTION 7 – EXTENT OF INFORMATION, TRANSPARENCY AND NON-DISCRIMINATION Principle C Attestations and information required by the importing country should be confined to essential information that is related to the objectives of the importing country’s food inspection and certification system. 15. The particular official attestations and information to be included on a certificate will be determined by the requirements of the importing country. Importing countries should make use of international standards, if available, with the objective of reducing the need for extensive detail in certificates. 16. Official attestations and information should be clearly identified in the text of the certificate and not be any more complex or detailed or onerous for the exporting country than is necessary to meet the objectives of the importing country’s food inspection and certification system. Such attestations may include, but are not limited to: – compliance with particular standards, production or processing requirements, if relevant; – the status (e.g. licensing details) of production, processing, packaging and/or storage establishments in the exporting country; – the exporting country’s animal health status if it may affect the safety of the food; and – reference to any associated bilateral/multilateral agreement. 17. Commercial or marketing specifications, such as specific product attributes or conformance to importer specifications should not be required in official certificates. 18. A consignment consisting of a food sample intended for evaluation, testing or research in the importing country should be clearly identified according to its intended use. It should be clearly indicated on the certificate or the package that the sample is not intended for retail sale and has no commercial value. Principle D The rationale and requirements for specific attestations and identifying information should be communicated to exporting countries in a consistent and transparent manner and be applied by the importing country in a non-discriminatory manner. 19. In establishing requirements for certificates, importing countries should ensure that criteria will apply equitably to all exporting countries in order to avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination. 20. Competent authorities of the importing country should, on request, communicate to the exporting country the requirements for the official attestations and information in certificates and their rationale. SECTION 8 – DESIGN OF OFFICIAL CERTIFICATES Principle E Official certificates regardless of their mode of transmission and their contents, should present certificate data elements in a form that simplifies and expedites the clearance process while meeting the importing country requirements. 21. The design and utilization of official certificates should: – simplify and expedite the clearance of the consignment at the point of entry or the point of control; – provide for accurate identification of the consignment being certified and the parties involved in the production and issuance of the certificate; – facilitate the importing country’s assessment of the validity of the certificate; and – minimize the potential for fraud. -- 4 of 16 -- CXG 38-2001 5 22. To the extent practicable, a standard format should be employed for official certificates. Certificates should: – clearly identify the certifying body and any other relevant parties involved in the production and issuance of the certificate;6 – be designed so as to minimize the potential for fraud including use of a unique identification number, or other appropriate means to ensure security (for example, use of watermark paper or other security measures for paper certificates, use of secure lines and systems for paperless exchange of certificates); – clearly describe the commodity and consignment to which the certificate relates; – contain a clear reference to those official requirements for which the certificate was issued; – contain attestations by the official or officially recognized certifying body which relates to the consignment described on that certificate and should not be required to be endorsed/re-certified after they are issued; – be in a language or languages fully understood by the certifying officer in the exporting country, in transit countries where appropriate, by the receiving authority in the importing country or those countries in which the inspection of the food takes place. Where required, the certificates can be accompanied by official translations; and – be formatted to enable paperless exchange by submission/transmission through a single window system when such a system is used by the importing or exporting countries. 23. The information related to the product being certified should be clearly documented on the certificate and should include as a minimum the following. It may also include additional information as agreed to by the importing and exporting country: – nature of the food;7 – name of product;8 – quantity, in the appropriate units;9 – a description of the commodity and consignment to which the certificate uniquely relates, e.g. lot identifier, means of transport, security seal number(s) or date coding; – identity and, as appropriate, the name and address of the producer/manufacturer of the food and/or storage establishments and their approval number; – name and contact details of the exporter or consignor; – name and contact details of the importer or consignee; – country of dispatch,10 or part of the country where these relate to specific attestations; and – country of destination.11 SECTION 9 – ISSUANCE AND RECEIPT OF OFFICIAL CERTIFICATES (RESPONSIBILITY OF CERTIFYING OFFICERS, SECURITY AND PREVENTION OF FRAUD) Principle F The competent authority of the exporting country is ultimately responsible for any certificate it issues 