i GL 32-1999 Adopted 1999. Revisions 2001, 2003, 2004 and 2007. Amendments 2008, 2009, 2010, 2012 and 2013. GUIDELINES FOR THE PRODUCTION, PROCESSING, LABELLING AND MARKETING OF ORGANICALLY PRODUCED FOODS GL 32–1999 PREFACE The Codex Alimentarius Commission is an intergovernmental body with over 180 members, within the framework of the Joint Food Standards Programme established by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO), with the purpose of protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in the food trade. The Commission also promotes coordination of all food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non governmental organizations. The Codex Alimentarius (Latin, meaning Food Law or Code) is the result of the Commission’s work: a collection of inter- nationally adopted food standards, guidelines, codes of practice and other recommendations. The texts in this publication are part of the Codex Alimentarius. Food labelling is the primary means of communication between the producer and seller of food on one hand, and the purchaser and consumer of the other. The Codex Alimentarius standards and guidelines on food labelling are published in a specific volume: Food Labelling – Complete Texts. In addition to the general recommendations, the Codex Committee on Food Labelling also provides guidance for certain claims commonly found in the market in order to provide clear information to the consumer. The Codex Committee on Food Labelling developed the Guidelines for the Production, Processing, Labelling and Marketing of Organically Produced Foods in view of the growing production and international trade in organically produced foods with a view to facilitating trade and preventing misleading claims. The Guidelines are intended to facilitate the harmonization of requirements for organic products at the international level, and may also provide assistance to governments wishing to establish national regulations in this area. The Guidelines include general sections describing the organic production concept and the scope of the text; description and definitions; labelling and claims (including products in transition/conversion); rules of production and preparation, including criteria for the substances allowed in organic production; inspection and certification systems; and import control. Further information on labelling texts, or any other aspect of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, may be obtained from: The Secretary, Codex Alimentarius Commission, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00153, Rome Italy fax: +39(06)57.05.45.93 email: codex@fao.org Internet address: http://www.codexalimentarius.net -- 1 of 36 -- ii GL 32-1999 TABLE OF CONTENTS FOREWORD 1 SECTION 1. SCOPE 2 SECTION 2. DESCRIPTION AND DEFINITIONS 3 2.1 Description 3 2.2 Definitions 3 SECTION 3. LABELLING AND CLAIMS 4 General provisions 4 Labelling of products in transition/conversion to organic 5 Labelling of non-retail containers 5 SECTION 4. RULES OF PRODUCTION AND PREPARATION 6 SECTION 5. REQUIREMENTS FOR INCLUSION OF SUBSTANCES IN ANNEX 2 AND CRITERIA FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LISTS OF SUBSTANCES BY COUNTRIES 6 The open nature of the lists 7 SECTION 6. INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS 7 SECTION 7. IMPORTS 8 ANNEX 1. PRINCIPLES OF ORGANIC PRODUCTION 10 A. Plants and plant products 10 B. Livestock and livestock products 11 General principles 11 Livestock sources/origin 11 Conversion 12 Nutrition 12 Health care 13 Livestock husbandry, transport and slaughter 14 Housing and free-range conditions 15 Manure management 16 Record keeping and identification 16 Species specific requirements 16 C. Handling, storage, transportation, processing and packaging 18 Pest management 18 Processing and manufacturing 18 Packaging 18 Storage and transport 18 ANNEX 2. PERMITTED SUBSTANCES FOR THE PRODUCTION OF ORGANIC FOODS 19 ANNEX 3. MINIMUM INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS AND PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES UNDER THE INSPECTION OR CERTIFICATION SYSTEM 32 A. Production units 32 B. Preparation and packaging units 33 C. Imports 34 -- 2 of 36 -- 1 GL 32-1999 GUIDELINES FOR THE PRODUCTION, PROCESSING, LABELLING AND MARKETING OF ORGANICALLY PRODUCED FOODS GL 32–1999 FOREWORD 1. These guidelines have been prepared for the purpose of providing an agreed approach to the requirements which underpin production of, and the labelling and claims for, organically produced foods. 2. The aims of these guidelines are: • to protect consumers against deception and fraud in the market place and unsubstantiated product claims; • to protect producers of organic produce against misrepresentation of other agricultural produce as being organic; • to ensure that all stages of production, preparation, storage, transport and marketing are subject to inspection and comply with these guidelines; • to harmonize provisions for the production, certification, identification and labelling have organically grown produce; • to provide international guidelines for organic food control systems in order to facilitate recognition of national systems as equivalent for the purposes of imports; and • to maintain and enhance organic agricultural systems in each country so as to contribute to local and global preservation. 3. These guidelines are at this stage a first step into official international harmonization of the requirements for organic products in terms of production and marketing standards, inspection arrangements and labelling requirements. In this area the experience with the development of such requirements and their implementation is still very limited. Moreover, consumer perception on the organic production method may, in certain detailed but important provisions, differ from region to region in the world. Therefore, the following is recognized at this stage: • the guidelines are a useful instrument in assisting countries to develop national regimes regulating production, marketing and labelling of organic foods; • the guidelines need regular improvement and updating in order to take into account technical progress and the experience with their implementation; • the guidelines do not prejudice the implementation of more restrictive arrangements and more detailed rules by member countries in order to maintain consumer credibility and prevent fraudulent practices, and to apply such rules to products from other countries on the basis of equivalency to such more restrictive provisions. 4. These guidelines set out the principles of organic production at farm, preparation, storage, transport, labelling and marketing stages, and provides an indication of accepted permitted inputs for soil fertilizing and conditioning, plant pest and disease control and, food additives and processing aids. For labelling purposes, the use of terms inferring that organic production methods have been used are restricted to products derived from operators under the supervision of a certification body or authority. 5. Organic agriculture is one among the broad spectrum of methodologies which are supportive of the environment. Organic production systems are based on specific and precise standards of production which aim at achieving optimal agroecosystems which are socially, ecologically and economically sustainable. Terms such as “biological” and “ecological” are also used in an effort to describe the organic system more clearly. Requirements for organically produced foods differ from those for other agricultural products in that production procedures are an intrinsic part of the identification and labelling of, and claim for, such products. 6. “Organic” is a labelling term that denotes products that have been produced in accordance with organic production standards and certified by a duly constituted certification body or authority. Organic agriculture is based on minimizing the use of external inputs, avoiding the use of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides. Organic agriculture practices cannot ensure that products are completely free of residues, due to general environmental pollution. However, methods are used to minimize pollution of air, soil and water. Organic food handlers, processors and retailers adhere to standards to maintain the integrity of organic agriculture products. The primary goal of organic agriculture is to optimize the health and productivity of interdependent communities of soil life, plants, animals and people. -- 3 of 36 -- 2 GL 32-1999 7. Organic agriculture is a holistic production management system which promotes and enhances agroecosystem health, including biodiversity, biological cycles, and soil biological activity. It emphasizes the use of management practices in preference to the use of off-farm inputs, taking into account that regional conditions require locally adapted systems. This is accomplished by using, where possible, cultural, biological and mechanical methods, as opposed to using synthetic materials, to fulfil any specific function within the system. An organic production system is designed to: a) enhance biological diversity within the whole system; b) increase soil biological activity; c) maintain long-term soil fertility; d) recycle wastes of plant and animal origin in order to return nutrients to the land, thus minimizing the use of non-renewable resources; e) rely on renewable resources in locally organized agricultural systems; f) promote the healthy use of soil, water and air as well as minimize all forms of pollution thereto that may result from agricultural practices; g) handle agricultural products with emphasis on careful processing methods in order to maintain the organic integrity and vital qualities of the product at all stages; h) become established on any existing farm through a period of conversion, the appropriate length of which is determined by site-specific factors such as the history of the land, and type of crops and livestock to be produced. 8. The concept of close contact between the consumer and the producer is a long established practice. Greater market demand, the increasing economic interests in production, and the increasing distance between producer and consumer has stimulated the introduction of external control and certification procedures. 9. An integral component of certification is the inspection of the organic management system. Procedures for operator certification are based primarily on a yearly description of the agricultural enterprise as prepared by the operator in cooperation with the inspection body. Likewise, at the processing level, standards are also developed against which the processing operations and plant conditions can be inspected and verified. Where the inspection process is undertaken by the certification body or authority, there must be clear separation of the inspection and certification function. In order to maintain their integrity, certification bodies or authorities which certify the procedures of the operator should be independent of economic interests with regard to the certification of operators. 10. Apart from a small portion of agricultural commodities marketed directly from the farm to consumers, most products find their way to consumers via established trade channels. To minimize deceptive practices in the market place, specific measures are necessary to ensure that trade and processing enterprises can be audited effectively. Therefore, the regulation of a process, rather than a final product, demands responsible action by all involved parties. 11. Import requirements should be based on the principles of equivalency and transparency as set out in the Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification.1 In accepting imports of organic products, countries would usually assess the inspection and certification procedures and the standards applied in the exporting country. 12. Recognizing that organic production systems continue to evolve and that organic principles and standards will continue to be developed under these guidelines, the Codex Committee on Food Labelling (CCFL) shall review these guidelines on a regular basis. The CCFL shall initiate this review process by inviting member governments and international organizations to make proposals to the CCFL regarding amendments to these guidelines prior to each CCFL meeting. SECTION 1. SCOPE 1.1 These guidelines apply to the following products which carry, or are intended to carry, descriptive labelling referring to organic production methods: a) unprocessed plants and plant products, livestock and livestock products to the extent that the principles of production and specific inspection rules for them are introduced in Annexes 1 and 3; and 1 CAC/GL 20-1995. -- 4 of 36 -- 3 GL 32-1999 b) processed agricultural crop and livestock products2 intended for human consumption derived from (a) above. 1.2 A product will be regarded as bearing indications referring to organic production methods where, in the labelling or claims, including advertising material or commercial documents, the product, or its ingredients, is described by the terms “organic”, “biodynamic”, “biological”, “ecological”, or words of similar intent including diminutives which, in the country where the product is placed on the market, suggests to the purchaser that the product or its ingredients were obtained according to organic production methods. 1.3 Paragraph 1.2 does not apply where these terms clearly have no connection with the method of production. 1.4 These guidelines apply without prejudice to other Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) provisions governing the production, preparation, marketing, labelling and inspection of the products specified in paragraph 1.1. 1.5 All materials and/or the products produced from genetically engineered/modified organisms (GEO/GMO) are not compatible with the principles of organic production (either the growing, manufacturing, or processing) and therefore are not accepted under these guidelines. SECTION 2. DESCRIPTION AND DEFINITIONS 2.1 Description Foods should only refer to organic production methods if they come from an organic farm system employing management practices which seek to nurture ecosystems which achieve sustainable productivity, and provide weed, pest and disease control through a diverse mix of mutually dependent life forms, recycling plant and animal residues, crop selection and rotation, water management, tillage and cultivation. Soil fertility is maintained and enhanced by a system which optimizes soil biological activity and the physical and mineral nature of the soil as the means to provide a balanced nutrient supply for plant and animal life as well as to conserve soil resources. Production should be sustainable with the recycling of plant nutrients as an essential part of the fertilizing strategy. Pest and disease management is attained by means of the encouragement of a balanced host/predator relationship, augmenta