CAC/GL 74-2010 Page 1 of 22 GUIDELINES ON PERFORMANCE CRITERIA AND VALIDATION OF METHODS FOR DETECTION, IDENTIFICATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF SPECIFIC DNA SEQUENCES AND SPECIFIC PROTEINS IN FOODS * CAC/GL 74-2010 SECTION 1 – INTRODUCTION 1. Molecular and immunological analytical methods are currently the recognized tools for determination of DNA and protein analytes in foods. However, in order for the results obtained by such methods from different laboratories to gain wide acceptability and confidence as reliable, there is need for the analytical methods to satisfy certain quality criteria. 2. These guidelines provide appropriate criteria to validate the performance of methods developed to detect specific DNA sequences or specific proteins in foods. 3. Information relating to general considerations for the validation of methods for the analysis of specific DNA sequences and specific protein is given in the first part of these Guidelines. Specific annexes are provided that contain information on validation of quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) methods, validation of qualitative PCR methods and validation of protein-based methods. SECTION 1.1 – PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 4. The goal of this document is to support the establishment of molecular and immunological methods for detection, identification and quantification of specific DNA sequences and specific proteins in foods, which produce results with comparable reproducibility when performed at different laboratories 5. The guidelines are aimed at providing guidance on how to establish methods to detect and identify specific DNA sequences and proteins in food by defining appropriate validation criteria, and whether or not a method complies with these criteria based on the performance characteristics of a method. The guidelines specify the relevant criteria and give explanations on how to consider these criteria, i.e.: -by providing the rationale for the most relevant criteria and -by showing how to find out whether or not a method fulfils the given criteria requirements. SECTION 1.2 SCOPE 6. These guidelines provide information on criteria for the validation of food analysis methods involving the detection, identification and quantification of specific DNA sequences and specific proteins of interest that may be present in foods, including those foods containing materials derived from modern biotechnology. These molecular and immunological methods are applicable to a wide range of uses such as tests for biomarkers in foods, including those derived from modern biotechnology and food authentication, and may be used by laboratories responsible for food analysis. SECTION 2 – METHOD VALIDATION 7. The Codex Alimentarius Commission places an emphasis on the acceptance of methods of analysis which have been validated through a collaborative trial conforming to an internationally accepted protocol according to ISO 5725:1994 or the AOAC/IUPAC Harmonized Protocol. In this area there may be a need to adopt a formal single-laboratory validation as an interim measure in the absence of collaborative trial data. However, methods used for the analysis of DNA sequences and proteins, must be capable of being performed in many laboratories. * for applications such as food derived from modern biotechnology, food authentication, food speciation and other purposes -- 1 of 22 -- CAC/GL 74-2010 Page 2 of 22 Section 2.1 – Criteria Approach 8. These guidelines apply the “criteria approach”. Section 2.2 – General Method Criteria 9. The general criteria for the selection of methods of analysis have been adopted in the Codex Procedural Manual. Such criteria are applied in this guideline. Additional criteria are described in the appropriate annexes. Section 2.3 – Validation Process 10. Method validation is a process to establish the performance characteristics and limitations of an analytical method. The results of a validation process describe which analytes can be determined in what kind of matrices in the presence of which interference. The validation exercise results in precision and trueness values of a certain analytical method under the examined conditions. 11. Formal validation of a method is the conclusion of a long process, which includes the following main steps: • Pre-validation of the method. Pre-validation should be performed on a case-by case as needed. Pre-validation should ensure that a method performs in a manner, which allows a successful conclusion of the validation study, i.e. it should provide evidence about the suitability of the method for its intended purpose. Pre-validation should preferably be carried out by involving 2 - 4 laboratories. Statistical analyses (e.g. of “repeatability” and “reproducibility”) should be made according to the validation procedure to be subsequently used. • Validation of the method. Validation through a collaborative trial is expensive to undertake and usually follows only after the method has shown acceptable performance both in a single- laboratory and a pre-validation study. SECTION 3 – SPECIFIC CONSIDERATION FOR THE VALIDATION OF METHODS FOR THE DETECTION, IDENTIFICATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF DNA SEQUENCES AND PROTEINS Section 3.1 – Method Development to Formal Validation 12. Common methodologies for DNA-based analysis are PCR-based methods used to detect a specific (targeted) DNA sequence. Common approaches for protein utilize Enzyme-Linked Immuno-Sorbent Assay (ELISA) and lateral flow devices. For DNA-based analysis, the PCR approach is presently most widely applied, although other DNA-based methods that achieve the same objective may be employed if properly validated. Both DNA and protein-based approaches are considered here. Section 3.1.1 – Method Acceptance Criteria (Required condition for validation) 13. In order to evaluate a method prior to validation, information concerning both the method and the method testing is required, as detailed in Annex I. 14. The method evaluation should verify that the principle preconditions for using the method for Codex purposes are fulfilled. This section describes the method acceptance criteria, which have to be fulfilled by the method in order to conduct a pre-validation and full collaborative trial. Section 3.1.2 – Applicability of the Method 15. Applicability of the methods could be determined by confirming whether the methods may be used in the intended foods with the required performance and it should be clearly stated. Especially, in analysis of the DNA sequences and protein, some methods that can be applied to a single raw matrix may not be necessarily applicable to complex matrices and/or processed food, since the DNA and protein may be altered. 16. In principle the method should be applicable to the matrix of concern. In the case of “general purpose” methods to identify and quantify DNA sequences and proteins in a range of food matrices, at least one extraction method applicable to a general food matrix should be available. -- 2 of 22 -- CAC/GL 74-2010 Page 3 of 22 Section 3.1.3 – Principle condition 17. DNA-based methods should detect, identify and may quantify the levels of specific DNA sequence(s). Protein-based methods should detect, identify and may quantify the level of a specific protein in the product. 18. Currently, the DNA-based detection method typically consists of PCR methodology and includes: • a protocol describing an extraction method which is applicable to a relevant matrix; • a protocol describing the conditions, including the apparatus used, under which PCR can be used to detect the target DNA sequence; • a description of the oligonucleotide primer sequences which uniquely amplify the target DNA sequence; • If applicable, a description of the fluorescent oligonucleotide probe sequence which uniquely identifies the target DNA sequence. • a description of oligonucleotide primer sequences, which amplify a taxon-specific DNA sequence that should be present in the conventional food matrix irrespective of the presence of the specific analyte, in order to differentiate a negative result from failed extraction/amplification processes, and to quantify the amount of target DNA relative to the taxon-specific DNA. • if applicable, a description of the fluorescent oligonucleotide probe sequence which uniquely identifies the taxon-specific DNA sequence. • a description of the method used to detect the DNA • appropriate control samples and standards. • descriptions of calculations used to derive the result. 19. Protein-based methods typically consist of a quantitative or qualitative method. These are usually immuno-sorbent analysis systems, and consist of the following: • a protocol describing an extraction method which is applicable to a relevant matrix; • a protocol describing the conditions, including the apparatus used, under which immuno- sorbent analysis can be used to detect the target protein; • an antibody-coated support, • an enzyme-conjugated secondary antibody, • an enzyme substrate for colour development, and • washing buffer and sample extraction buffer. • a description of the method used to detect the protein • appropriate control samples and standards. • descriptions of calculations used to derive the result. 20. The method should fulfil the requirements below: • Protein-based methods should allow for unequivocal detection, identification and/or quantification of a specific antigen or epitope. • DNA-based screening methods are used to detect a target DNA present in multiple organisms. For instance, screening methods that are used to detect multiple transformation events should allow for detection of a target DNA sequence which is common to a number of transformation events. -- 3 of 22 -- CAC/GL 74-2010 Page 4 of 22 • DNA-based specific methods that are used for unequivocal detection, identification and/or quantification of a specific organism which could be mixed with similar organisms should allow for the unequivocal detection, identification and/or quantification of a DNA sequence that is unique or specific to that organism. For instance, target-specific methods that are used for detection of a single transformation event should allow for unequivocal detection, identification and/or quantification of a DNA sequence that is unique or specific to that transformation event. For food authentication, the specific target sequence/s should uniquely define the taxon as required. • DNA-based taxon-specific methods that are used for detection or relative quantification of target DNA should allow for unequivocal detection, identification and quantification of a DNA sequence that is unique or specific to that taxon • For target and taxon-specific methods used in relative quantification, identification of the amplified fragment, by e.g. probe hybridization or any appropriate equivalent method, is recommended. Section 3.1.4 – Unit of Measurement and reporting of results 21. Appropriate units of measurement (e.g. target copy numbers or molar equivalents), performance and data reporting criteria should be specified for each method prior to their use. For qualitative analysis, the results can be provided as present or not detected and for this reason there is no unit of measurement. 22. Measurements may be explicitly expressed as weight/weight or by relative percentage. However, none of the current methods (DNA or protein based) are able to measure them directly. Section 3.1.5 – Measurement Uncertainty 23. As mentioned in the Codex Guideline on Measurement Uncertainty (CAC/GL 54-2004), laboratories are required to estimate the uncertainty of their quantitative measurements. Sample preparation and analytical methods are two significant sources for error that should be considered when evaluating an analytical measurement. Analysts using methods which have been validated according to these guidelines should have sufficient information to allow them to estimate the uncertainty of their result. 24. For details, refer to the Codex Guideline on Measurement Uncertainty (CAC/GL 54-2004), the section entitled “The Use of Analytical Results: Sampling Plans, Relationship between the Analytical Results, the Measurement Uncertainty, Recovery Factors and Provisions in Codex Standard” from the Codex Procedural Manual. Section 3.1.6 – Modular Approach to Method Validation 25. The “method” refers to all the experimental procedures needed to estimate the measurand in a particular matrix. For a particular material this may include the processes for DNA or protein extraction and the final quantification in a PCR or Immuno-sorbent assay system, or a determination of the presence or absence of the analyte via a qualitative method. In such a case, the whole chain from extraction up to the analytical step constitutes a method. However, it may be possible to use the same sample preparation (e.g. grinding) method in combination with the same DNA or protein isolation process for several different subsequent analyses to achieve economic efficiencies as long as the validated method processes remain the same. 26. It would be inappropriate to substitute alternative processes, such as a different DNA or protein isolation process, into a validated method without conducting additional studies to show that the substitution does not affect the performance of the method. Section 3.2 – Collaborative Trial Requirements Section 3.2.1 – General Information 27. The purpose of a collaborative trial is to validate the data provided by previous testing in a pre-validation or a single laboratory exercise and to determine methodological precision in terms of repeatability and reproducibility. -- 4 of 22 -- CAC/GL 74-2010 Page 5 of 22 28. The values of any performance parameters reported from validation studies should be interpreted and compared with care. The exact values and their interpretation may depend – besides the performance of the method - on the extent of the method. 29. If a collaborative trial has been conducted according to the ISO 5725:1994 or the AOAC/IUPAC Harmonized Protocol, then this information can be used to assess the acceptability of the method. Section 3.2.2 – Minimum Performance Requirements 30. In a collaborative trial, the method performance should comply with the relevant parts of the method acceptance criteria and fulfil the method performance requirements specifically set below for the collaborative trial. In particular, the compliance with the criteria for sensitivity and repeatability/reproducibility standard deviations and trueness should be assessed. 31. In addition to the method acceptance criteria, at least the method performance requirements listed in Annex I should be evaluated from the experimental data of a collaborative trial. 32. The methods and their associated validation data will be revised on a regular basis as the scientific knowledge and experience gained in validation and collaborative trials evolve. These Guidelines are complemented with practical information about the opera