GUIDELINES FOR THE CONTROL OF SHIGA TOXIN-PRODUCING E. COLI (STEC) IN RAW BEEF, FRESH LEAFY VEGETABLES, RAW MILK AND RAW MILK CHEESES, AND SPROUTS CXG 99-2023 Adopted in 2023. Revised in 2024. -- 1 of 47 -- CXG 99-2023 2 2024 Revisions Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, Annex II and Annex IV were added. -- 2 of 47 -- CXG 99-2023 3 1. INTRODUCTION Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) are recognized as foodborne pathogens causing human illnesses, with a wide range of mild to severe gastrointestinal presentations from asymptomatic to diarrhoea to bloody diarrhoea, occasionally leading to severe haemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) with kidney failure and death. STEC have occasionally been linked with neurological symptoms, including epileptic seizures and cognitive dysfunction. Strains of E. coli that are pathogenic to humans have been classified into several groups, and STEC are defined by the potential to produce one or more Shiga toxins. STEC strains are a diverse group which can cause disease in humans. STEC strains that can cause haemorrhagic colitis may be referred to as enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC). The most well-studied and documented STEC serotype is E. coli O157:H7. The burden of the disease is significant, with substantial outbreaks associated with diverse food commodities. Thus, STEC have a serious impact on public health. Clinical symptoms of the disease in humans arise as a consequence of consuming food contaminated with E. coli that produces Shiga toxin type 1 (Stx1, encoded by the gene stx1) and/or Shiga toxin type 2 (Stx2, encoded by the gene stx2). Historically, the term verotoxin has also been used for the Shiga toxins of E. coli and the term verotoxigenic E. coli (VTEC) used synonymously with STEC. In this document, the term “Shiga toxin” (Stx) is used to indicate the protein toxin “stx” to indicate the toxin gene, and “STEC” to indicate the E. coli strains demonstrated to carry stx and produce Stx. STEC are pathogenic to humans after ingestion and attachment to the intestinal epithelial cells where production of Stx occurs. Attachment to intestinal epithelial cells is the result of other proteins, including the principal adherence protein intimin, encoded by eae. The aggregative adherence fimbrial adhesins commonly associated with enteroaggregative E. coli, regulated by the aggR gene, when found in isolated strains with stx, have also been linked to severe illness and have been used as predictors of pathogenicity. Combinations of virulence genes and their association with disease severity that can be used for risk management purposes are described in these guidelines. There may be additional genes involved in pathogenicity that have not yet been identified. Some of these virulence genes are located on mobile genetic elements (e.g. plasmids, bacteriophages, pathogenicity islands) and can be horizontally transmitted to related microorganisms or be lost. Symptoms and their severity are determined by the variability in the virulence genes, among other factors such as gene expression, dose, host susceptibility, and age. Because STEC are primarily a genotype-based hazard, this has implications for hazard identification and characterization, which will be discussed in these guidelines. Direct contact with animals and person-to-person transmission have been identified as important routes of transmission. Historically, foodborne illnesses caused by STEC have been linked to the consumption of raw or undercooked ground/minced or tenderized (i.e. non-intact) beef; however, fresh leafy vegetables, sprouts, and dairy products (raw milk and raw milk cheeses) have been increasingly recognized as commodities that pose a risk of illness from STEC. Sources of STEC in these foods can vary, as does the ability of the organism to survive and multiply within them. The association of specific food categories with STEC illness reflects the historical and current practices of food production, distribution, and consumption. Changes in food production, distribution and consumption can cause changes in STEC exposure. Consequently, microbial risk management should be informed by an awareness of current local sources of STEC exposure. This guidance document will identify commodity-specific intervention practices based on known source attribution in these different foods, and practices for monitoring STEC in food products, including the utility of indicator microorganisms. It is generally accepted that animals, in particular ruminants, are the primary reservoir/source of STEC. STEC- positive ruminants are typically asymptomatic. Contamination with intestinal content or faeces is the most likely initial source of STEC in most foods. For example, STEC outbreaks have been associated with raw beef contaminated with STEC during the slaughtering process, field-grown fresh leafy vegetables have been linked to STEC-contaminated irrigation water, and STEC illnesses from sprouts have resulted from contamination during seed production enhanced during sprouting. Raw milk is most commonly contaminated as a result of soiled udders and teats, as well as poor hygiene during milking. The large degree of variation exhibited by STEC in their biological properties, host preferences, and environmental survival presents a challenge for managing the presence of STEC in animal and plant production. In practice, this means that there is no “one size fits all” solution, and different production systems may require different approaches to control STEC (such as approaches based on pathogenicity and ability to cause severe illness). In most instances, control measures will reduce STEC but not eliminate them. These guidelines build on general food hygiene provisions already established in the Codex system and propose potential control measures specific for STEC strains in raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts. -- 3 of 47 -- CXG 99-2023 4 Examples of control measures in each commodity-specific annex have been subjected to a scientific evaluation by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meetings on Microbiological Risk Assessment (JEMRA) in development of the guidelines. Such examples are illustrative only; their use and approval may vary among Member Countries. The format of this document:  provides an opening general section with STEC guidance applicable to all commodities;  demonstrates the range of the approaches of control measures for STEC;  facilitates development of hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) plans at individual establishments and at national levels; and  assists in assessing the equivalence (Guidelines on the judgement of equivalence of sanitary measures associated with food inspection and certification systems [CXG 53-2003]) 1 of control measures for raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts applied in different countries. The guidelines provide flexibility for use at the national (and individual processing) level. 2. OBJECTIVES These guidelines provide information to governments and food business operators (FBOs) on the control of STEC that aims to reduce foodborne disease from raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts. They provide a science-based and practical tool for the effective control of STEC in raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk intended for drinking and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts, according to national risk management decisions. The control measures that are selected can vary among countries and production systems. These guidelines do not set quantitative limits as described in the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997)2 for STEC in raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts. Rather, the guidelines describe control measures that countries can establish as appropriate to their national situation as described in the Principles and guidelines for the conduct of microbiological risk management (MRM) (CXG 63-2007).3 3. SCOPE AND USE OF THE GUIDELINES 3.1 Scope These guidelines are applicable to STEC that may contaminate raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milki and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts and cause foodborne disease. The primary focus is to provide information on scientifically-validated practices that may be used to prevent, reduce, or eliminate STEC contamination of raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts. 3.2 Use The guidelines provide specific control measures for STEC in raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts according to a primary production-to-consumption food chain approach, with potential control measures being identified at applicable steps in the process flow. The guidelines are supplementary to, and should be used in conjunction with, the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1- 1969),4 the Code of hygienic practice for meat (CXC 58-2005),5 the Code of hygienic practice for fresh fruits and vegetables (CXC 53-2003),6 the Code of hygienic practice for milk and milk products (CXC 57-2004),7 the Guidelines for the validation of food safety control measures (CXG 69-2008),8 the Principles and guidelines for the conduct of microbiological risk management (MRM) and the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods. These general and overarching provisions are mentioned as appropriate, and their content is not duplicated in these guidelines. i These guidelines present specific guidance for control of STEC related to raw milk intended for drinking and for production of raw milk cheeses. -- 4 of 47 -- CXG 99-2023 5 The guidelines present a number of control measures. These control measures will likely vary at the national level and therefore these guidelines only provide examples of them. Examples of control measures are limited to those that have been scientifically demonstrated as effective in a commercial setting. Countries should note that these control measures are indicative only. The quantifiable outcomes reported for control measures are specific to the conditions of particular studies, and the control measures would need to be validated under local commercial conditions to provide an estimate of hazard reduction. Governments and FBOs can choose hazard-based control measures to inform decisions on critical control points (CCPs) when applying HACCP principles to a particular food process. Several control measures as presented in these guidelines are based on the use of physical, chemical and biological decontamination processes to reduce the prevalence and/or concentration of STEC-positive commodities, for example decontamination of beef carcasses from slaughtered cattle (i.e. beef from animals of the species of Bos indicus, Bos taurus, and Bubalus bubalis). The use of these control measures is subject to approval by the competent authority, where appropriate, and varies based upon the type of product being produced. Also, these guidelines do not preclude the choice of any other control measure that is not included in the examples provided herein, and that may have been scientifically validated as being effective in a commercial setting. The provision of flexibility in the application of the guidelines is an important attribute. They are primarily intended for use by government risk managers and FBOs in the design and implementation of food hygiene systems. The guidelines should be useful when assessing whether different food safety measures for raw beef, fresh leafy vegetables, raw milk and raw milk cheeses, and sprouts in different countries are appropriate. 4. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these guidelines, the following terms are defined as below: Control measure: Any action or activity that can be used to prevent or eliminate a hazard or reduce it to an acceptable level (General principles of food hygiene [CXC 1-1969]).4 Fresh leafy vegetables: Vegetables of a leafy nature where the leaf is intended for raw consumption, including, but not limited to, all varieties of lettuce, spinach, cabbage, chicory, endive, kale, radicchio, and fresh herbs such as coriander/cilantro, basil, curry leaf, colocasia leaves and parsley, among other local products for foliar consumption. Indicator microorganisms: Microorganisms used as an indicator of quality, process efficacy, or hygienic status of food, water, or the environment, commonly used to suggest conditions that would allow the potential presence or proliferation of pathogens, a failure in process hygiene or in food processing. Examples of indicator microorganisms include mesophilic aerobic bacteria, coliforms or faecal coliforms, E. coli and Enterobacteriaceae. Monitor: The act of conducting a planned sequence of observations or measurements of control parameters to assess whether a control measure is under control (General principles of food hygiene). Raw beef: Skeletal muscle meat from slaughtered cattle, including primal cuts,ii sub-primal cuts, and trimmings. Raw milk: Milk (as defined in the General standard for the use of dairy terms [CXS 206-1999])9 which has not been heated beyond 40 ºC or undergone any treatment that has an equivalent effect.iii, iv See also the Code of hygienic practice for milk and milk products (CXC 57-2004).7 Raw milk cheeses: Cheeses made from raw milk. Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC): A diverse group of pathogenic bacterial strains of Escherichia coli that are demonstrated to carry Shiga toxin genes (stx) and produce Shiga toxin protein (Stx). ii A primal cut is a piece of meat on the bone initially separated from the carcass of an animal during butchering. Primal cuts are then divided into sub-primal cuts. These are basic sections from which steaks and other subdivisions are made. iii Temperatures between 40 ºC and pasteurization temperatures are generally considered to be insufficient to consistently kill STEC in raw milk. Heat treatment beyond 40 ºC results in changes such that the structure of the resultant product is no longer the same as that of raw milk. iv Milk that has been subject to processing techniques such as microfiltration and/or bactofugation is no longer considered raw milk because these processes require milk to be heated above 40 °C. -- 5 of 47 -- CXG 99-2023 6 Sprouts: Sprouted seeds or beans harvested when the cotyledons (or seed leaves) are still un- or underdeveloped and true leaves have not begun to emerge. They can be grown in water, soil or substrate and can be harvested with or without the root (cut sprouts) (FAO and WHO. 2022. Prevention and control of microbiological hazards in fresh fruits and vegetables – Part 3, sprouts. Meeting report. Microbiological Risk Assessment Series No. 43. Rome).10 Validation of control measures: Obtaining evid