Adopted in 2007. Annex II on Guidance on Microbiological Risk Management Metrics adopted in 2008.Editorial amendment 2013. PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR THE CONDUCT OF MICROBIOLOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT (MRM) CAC/GL 63-2007 INTRODUCTION Diseases caused by foodborne microbial hazards1 constitute a world-wide public health concern. During the past several decades, the incidence of foodborne diseases has increased in many parts of the world. Foodborne threats occur for a number of reasons. These include microbial adaptation, changes in the food production systems, including new feeding practices, changes in animal husbandry, agronomic process and food technology, increase in international trade, susceptible populations and travel, change in lifestyle and consumers demands, changes in human demographics and behaviour. The globalisation of food markets has increased the challenge to manage these risks. Effective management of risks arising from microbial hazards is technically complex. Food safety has been traditionally, and will continue to be, the responsibility of industry operating an array of control measures relating to the food hygiene within an overall regulatory framework. Recently, risk analysis, involving its component parts of risk assessment, risk management and risk communication, has been introduced as a new approach in evaluating and controlling microbial hazards to help protecting the health of consumers and ensure fair practices in food trade. It could also facilitate the judgement of equivalence of food safety control systems. This document should be read in close conjunction with the Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in the Framework of the Codex Alimentarius2 and the Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CAC/GL 30 – 1999). Countries, organisations and individuals involved with MRM are encouraged to utilise these guidelines in concert with technical information developed by the World Health Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organisation and the Codex Alimentarius Commission (e.g. FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Risk Management and Food Safety-Paper N°65, Rome 1997, WHO Expert Consultation - The Interaction between Assessors and Managers of Microbial Hazards in Food, Kiel, Germany, March 2000 - The Principles and Guidelines for Incorporating Microbiological Risk Assessment in the Development of Food Safety Standards, Guidelines and Related Texts, Report Kiel, Germany, March 2002 – The Use of Microbiological Risk Assessment Outputs to Develop Practical Risk Management Strategies: Metrics to improve food safety, Kiel, Germany, April 2006. 1. SCOPE These principles and guidelines provide a framework for the MRM process and are intended for use by Codex and countries 3, as appropriate. They also provide guidance on the application of microbiological risk assessment (MRA) within the MRM process. Where specific recommendations apply only to Codex, or only to countries, this is so noted in the text. This document also provides useful guidance for other interested parties in implementing risk management options, such as industry4 and consumers who are involved in MRM on a day-to-day basis. 2. DEFINITIONS The definitions of risk analysis terms related to food safety incorporated in the Procedural Manual of the CAC5, shall apply. See definitions of hazard, risk, risk analysis, risk assessment, hazard identification, hazard characterisation, dose-response assessment, exposure assessment, risk characterisation, risk management, risk communication, risk assessment policy, risk profile, risk estimate, food safety objective (FSO), performance objective (PO), performance criterion (PC), traceability/product tracing and equivalence. The definitions from The Guidelines for the Application of the HACCP System6, e.g. control measure, step or critical control point, the definition of a microbiological criterion included in The Principles and Guidelines for the Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods (CAC/GL 21-1997) and the definition of interested parties included in The Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in the Framework of the Codex7 shall apply too. 1 Foodborne microbial hazards include (but are not limited to) pathogenic bacteria, viruses, algae, protozoa, fungi, parasites, prions, toxins and other harmful metabolites of microbial origin. 2 See Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual. 3 For the purpose of this document, each time the terms “country”, “government”, “national” are used, the provision applies both to Codex Members (Rule I) and Codex Member Organisations (Rule II), i. e. regional economic integration organisation (REIO) – see Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual. 4 For the purpose of this document, it is understood that industry includes all relevant sectors associated with the production, storage and handling of food, from primary production through retail and food service level (adapted from Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in the Framework of the Codex Alimentarius). 5 Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual. 6 Annex to CAC/RCP 1-1969. 7 Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual. -- 1 of 15 -- CAC/GL 63-2007 2 The definition of the appropriate level of protection (ALOP) is the one in the WTO Agreement on the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS agreement). The definitions of validation, verification and food safety control system are those in the Guidelines for the Validation of Food Safety Control Measures (CAC/GL 69-2008). Risk manager8 is defined as follows: a national or international governmental organisation with responsibility for MRM. 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR MRM •PRINCIPLE 1: Protection of human health is the primary objective in MRM. •PRINCIPLE 2: MRM should take into account the whole food chain. •PRINCIPLE 3: MRM should follow a structured approach. •PRINCIPLE 4: MRM process should be transparent, consistent and fully documented. •PRINCIPLE 5: Risk managers should ensure effective consultations with relevant interested parties. •PRINCIPLE 6: Risk managers should ensure effective interaction with risk assessors. •PRINCIPLE 7: Risk managers should take account of risks resulting from regional differences in hazards in the food chain and regional differences in available risk management options. •PRINCIPLE 8: MRM decisions should be subject to monitoring and review and, if necessary, revision. 4. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Codex and government decisions and recommendations have as their primary objective the protection of the health of consumers. Decision making should be timely to achieve that objective. In the MRM process, the ALOP is a key concept, as it is a reflection of a particular country’s expressed public health goals for foodborne risks. MRM should address the food chains as individual continuums, when considering means for controlling the public health risks associated with food. This should typically include primary production (including feeds, agricultural practices, and environmental conditions leading to the contamination of crops and animals), product design and processing, transport, storage, distribution, marketing, preparation, and consumption. This should include both domestic and imported products to the extent feasible. MRM should follow a structured approach that includes preliminary MRM activities, identification and selection of MRM options, implementation of MRM activities, and monitoring and review of the options taken. In order to facilitate a broader understanding by interested parties, MRM process should be transparent and fully documented. Risk managers should articulate and implement uniform procedures and practices to be used in the development and implementation of MRM, the determination of MRA policy, establishment of MRM priorities, allocation of resources (e.g. human, financial, time) and determination of the factors9 to be used in the evaluation of MRM options. They should ensure that the options selected protect the health of consumers, are scientifically justifiable, proportionate to the risk identified and are not more restrictive of trade or technological innovation than required to achieve the ALOP. Risk managers should ensure that decisions are practicable and effective, and where appropriate, enforceable. Risk managers should ensure effective and timely consultation with all relevant interested parties and provide a sound basis for understanding the MRM decision, its rationale and implications. The extent and nature of public consultation will depend on t he urgency, complexity and uncertainties related to the risk and the management strategies being considered. Decisions and recommendations on MRM should be documented, and where appropriate clearly identified in Codex or national standards and regulations, so as to facilitate a wider understanding of the conduct of MRM. The mandate given by risk managers to risk assessors relating to the conduct of an MRA should be as clear as possible. Interaction should allow risk managers to be informed by risk assessors of any constraints, data gaps, uncertainties, assumptions and their impact on the MRA. Where there is disagreement among the risk assessors, the risk managers should be informed of the minority opinions and these differences should be documented. 8 The definition of Risk Manager is derived from the definition for risk management which does not include all of the individuals who are involved in the implementation phase and related activities associated with MRM, i.e., MRM decisions are largely implemented by industry and other interested parties. The focus of the definition on risk manager is restricted to governmental organizations with authority to decide on the acceptability of risk levels associated to foodborne hazards. 9 See Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual. -- 2 of 15 -- CAC/GL 63-2007 3 MRM decisions regarding foodborne hazards will vary according to the regional microbial conditions. MRM should take into account the diversity of production methods and processes, inspection, monitoring and verifications systems, sampling and testing methods, distribution and marketing systems, consumer food use patterns, consumers’ perception and the prevalence of specific adverse health effect. MRM should be an iterative process and decisions made should be subject to timely review, taking into account all relevant newly generated data, with a goal toward further risk reduction and public health improvement. 5. PRELIMINARY MICROBIOLOGICAL RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 5.1 IDENTIFICATION OF A MICROBIOLOGICAL FOOD SAFETY ISSUE A food safety issue arises where one or more foodborne microbial hazard(s) are known or thought to be associated with one or many food(s) and thus requires consideration of a risk manager. The risk manager follows the MRM process to evaluate and where necessary manage the associated risk. At the start of this process, the food safety issue should be clearly identified and communicated from the risk managers to risk assessors, as well as affected consumers and industry. Food safety issue identification may be performed by the risk manager or be the result of collaboration between different interested parties. Within Codex, a food safety issue may be raised by a member government, or by an intergovernmental or observer organisation. Food safety issues may be identified on the basis of information arising from a variety of sources, such as surveys of the prevalence and concentration of hazards in the food chain or the environment, human disease surveillance data, epidemiological or clinical studies, laboratory studies, scientific, technological or medical advances, lack of compliance with standards, recommendations of experts, public input, etc. Some food safety issues may require that an immediate action10 be taken by the risk manager without further scientific consideration (e.g. requiring withdrawal / recall of contaminated products). Countries will often not be able to delay taking an immediate action when there is an imminent public health concern demanding an urgent response. Such measures should be temporary, clearly communicated as well as subject to review within a time frame. When there is evidence that a risk to human health exists but scientific data are insufficient or incomplete, it may be appropriate for countries to select a provisional decision, while obtaining additional information that may inform and, if necessary, modify the provisional decision. In those instances, the provisional nature of the decision should be communicated to all interested parties and the timeframe or circumstances under which the provisional decision will be reconsidered (e.g. reconsideration after the completion of a MRA) should be articulated when the decision is communicated initially). 5.2 MICROBIOLOGICAL RISK PROFILE The risk profile is a description of a food safety problem and its context that presents in a concise form, the current state of knowledge related to a food safety issue, describes potential MRM options that have been identified to date, when any, and the food safety policy context that will influence further possible actions. The Annex I provides information about suggested risk profile elements for guidance to risk managers at the national level, and for bringing forward newly proposed work within CCFH. Consideration of the information given in the risk profile may result in a range of initial decisions, such as commissioning an MRA, gathering more information or developing risk knowledge at the level of the risk manager, implementing an immediate and/or temporary decision (see section 5.1 above). National governments may also base their MRM decisions on Codex standards, recommendations and guidance where available. In some cases, the risk profile could give enough information for identification and selection of MRM options. In other cases, no further action may be needed. The risk profile provides an initial analysis that describes possible MRM options. The MRM options can take the form of a draft MRM guidance document that will be introduced into the Codex step process (e.g., codes of practice, guidance documents, microbiological specifications, etc.). 5.3 RISK ASSESSMENT POLICY Refer to the Working Principles for Risk Analysis for the Application in the Framework of the Codex Alimentarius11. National governments should establish a MRA policy relevant to their circumstances, in advance of the microbiological risk assessment. 10 The International Health Regulation (2005) Agreement gives provisions for appropriate measures in case of public health emergencies, including food related events (www.who.int/csr/ihr/ihrwha58_3-en.pdf). The Principles and Guidelines for the Exchange of Information in Food Safety Emergency Situation (CAC/GL 19-1995) defines a food safety emergency as a situation wh