GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL REGULATORY FOOD SAFETY ASSURANCE PROGRAMME ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOOD PRODUCING ANIMALS CAC/GL 71-2009 Adopted 2009. Revision 2012, 2014. -- 1 of 42 -- CAC/GL 71-2009 2 Table of Contents 1. INTRODUCTION 2. SCOPE 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES 4. APPROACH BASED ON RISK 5. DEFINITIONS (FOR THE PURPOSE OF THESE GUIDELINES) 6. REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 6.1 Roles 6.2 Approval by competent authority 6.3 Information on veterinary drugs 6.4 Sale and use 6.5 Responsibilities of business operators (best practice guidance) 7. VERIFICATION PROGRAMMES 7.1 Purpose 7.2 General design principles 7.3 System and targeted verification programme design 7.4 Risk profiling 8. CHOICE OF VERIFICATION PROGRAMME 8.1 System verification programmes 8.2 Risk targeted verification programmes 8.3 Surveys 8.4 Review 9. SAMPLE TAKING 9.1 General principles 9.2 Traceability/product tracing 10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 10.1 General 10.2 Retention of consignments during laboratory analysis 10.3 Result interpretation 10.4 Port of entry testing programmes (specific requirements) 11. REGULATORY ACTION 11.1 Investigation of non-compliances 11.2 Measures in case of non-compliance: Conduct 11.3 Measures in case of non-compliance: Product 11.4 Corrective action in case of non-compliance 12. INTERACTION BETWEEN THE CONTROL PROGRAMMES OF TWO COMPETENT AUTHORITIES Analytical methods for residue control General considerations on analytical methods for residue control 13. INTRODUCTION 14. INTEGRATING ANALYTICAL METHODS FOR RESIDUE CONTROL 15. CONSIDERATION FOR SELECTION AND VALIDATION OF ANALYTICAL METHODS 15.1 Identification of Methods Requirements 15.2 Implementing other Codex Alimentarius Commission Guidelines 15.3 Method Validation and Fitness for Purpose 15.4 Single Laboratory Validation – The Criteria Approach Attributes of analytical methods for residues of veterinary drugs in foods 16. INTRODUCTION -- 2 of 42 -- CAC/GL 71-2009 3 17. METHOD DEVELOPMENT CONSIDERATION 18. ANALYTICAL PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS 18.1 Performance Characteristics of Screening Methods 18.2 Performance Characteristics for Quantitative Methods 18.3 Performance Characteristics for Confirmatory Methods 18.4 General Performance Characteristics for Methods for Use in a Regulatory Control Programme 19. METHOD DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION CONSIDERATIONS FOR RESIDUE CONTROL METHODS 19.1 Selection of Appropriate Test Material for Validation 19.2 Measurement Uncertainty 19.3 Use of Internal Standards 19.4 Environmental Considerations 19.5 Choice of Validation Model 19.6 Quality Control and Quality Assurance Appendix A – Sampling strategies A1. NON-BIASED SAMPLING A1.1 Purpose A1.2 Statistical considerations on sampling population size A1.3 Sampling Confidence reporting A2. DIRECTED OR TARGETED SAMPLING A2.1 Purpose Appendix B – Sampling of commodities B1. SCOPE B2. DEFINITIONS B3. SAMPLING PROCEDURES B4. SPECIFIC SAMPLE PREPARATION INSTRUCTIONS FOR HONEY B5. STATISTICAL CONCERNS B5.1. Stratified random sampling B5.2 Systematic sampling B5.3 Biased or estimated worst case sampling B6. PREPARATION OF LABORATORY SAMPLES B7. SHIPMENT OF LABORATORY SAMPLES B8. RESULT INTERPRETATION IN THE LABORATORY B9. SAMPLING RECORDS Guidance on sample type and quantity for different commodities Table A: Meat and poultry products Table B: Milk, eggs and dairy products Table C: Aquaculture products Appendix C – Performance Characteristics for Multi-Residue Methods (MRMs) for Veterinary Drugs C1. SCOPE C2. DEFINITIONS C3. SUMMARY OF PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS TO BE CHARACTERISED AND DEFINED FOR MULTI-RESIDUE ANALYTICAL METHODS C4. PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS FOR MRMS C5. PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS OF MRMS FOR SCREENING ANALYSIS C6. PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS OF MRMS FOR QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS C7. PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS FOR MRMS FOR CONFIRMATORY METHODS C8. VALIDATION OF THE FULLY CHARACTERIZED MRMS -- 3 of 42 -- CAC/GL 71-2009 4 1. INTRODUCTION Modern food production systems should be designed and managed to ensure that the exposure of food producing animals to veterinary drugs does not pose a risk to human health. The commercial entities involved in the production and marketing of food have the primary responsibility for ensuring food safety. The role of competent authorities is to control the use of veterinary drugs and to verify that appropriate practices are being applied and effective measures are in place within the veterinary drug distribution and food production systems to provide effective protection for consumer health and ensure fair practice in the food trade, consistent with the goals of Codex Alimentarius. All parties also have a responsibility to provide consumers information and education to facilitate sound choice of food products of animal origin. The application of a programme based on risk to all food types should provide the controls and verification consistent with the risk that the food type may pose to consumers. The application of an approach based on risk across all food groups and hazard classes should allow a more focussed application of resources to those areas which are most likely to generate real human health protection gains. Risk profiles for different hazards may vary by country, region, species and/or production system. The application of a control and verification assurance programme based on risk should provide the necessary basis for exporting countries to certify the safety of exported food, and for importing countries to have the confidence to accept such consignments. It is recognized that in particular developing countries may need a transition period and/or technical assistance regarding the full implementation of these Guidelines. 2. SCOPE This guide is intended to provide the overarching principles and guidance for governments on the design and implementation of national and trade related food safety assurance programmes for residues of veterinary drugs. The current and future annexes to this guide may provide a further refinement of guidance on issues which may be relevant to the control and verification programmes for products from certain species. These annexes should be read in conjunction with the principles outlined in this guide. 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES Programmes for the control of residues of veterinary drugs in foods should: i. Be based on risk using realistic risk profiles assessed as reasonably likely to be associated with food derived from the relevant productions system(s); ii. Be prevention focussed based on the realistic risk profiles associated with the probable or known use of approved, non-approved and prohibited veterinary drugs in the production system; iii. Include regulatory measures proportionate to the relative human health risk associated with these hazards compared with other food-associated hazards; iv. Ensure all parties involved in the production, marketing and processing system of the animals and/or the food products derived from them are held accountable to ensure that unsafe animal products will not be sold as a result of their action or inaction; v. Recognise that pre-harvest controls and practices are the primary means for ensuring safe food; vi. Recognise that the primary role of audits and sampling programmes is to verify the implementation and effectiveness of the pre-harvest controls and practices; vii. Focus on system and population based assurances; and viii. Be cost effective and have the support of stakeholders. It should be recognised that veterinary drugs are regulated in many countries for a variety of reasons, such as animal health, animal welfare and protection of the environment. Where these uses and the related standards do not fall under the mandate of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, they should be clearly identified and justified where, for reason of efficiency, they form part of the Competent Authority’s residue control programme. The Codex Alimentarius Commission’s recommended sampling procedures for residues of veterinary drugs in food are exempted from the general sampling procedures of food commodities developed by the Codex -- 4 of 42 -- CAC/GL 71-2009 5 Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling. Accordingly, this guideline includes sampling procedures relevant for the entire control programme. The safety of foods is achieved by the implementation of appropriate rules applied from primary production or import to retail or export and requires the participation of all parties involved. Competent Authorities should verify correct implementation of programmes and, where necessary, if action has been taken. The reliability of laboratory results is important for the decision making of Competent Authorities. Thus official laboratories should use methods validated as fit for purpose and work under internationally accepted (e.g. ISO 17025) quality management principles. A control programme designed and implemented according to this guideline provides reassurance for importing countries to accept consignments certified as safe by the exporting country. 4. APPROACH BASED ON RISK An approach based on risk applied across the entire production chain and on all food groups and potential hazards will allow Competent Authorities to focus application of resources to areas of highest risk which are most likely to have an impact on consumer health protection. Continuous application of good practices and regular control contribute more significantly to food safety than end product testing. Residues may exert an adverse effect on consumers in a number of ways, such as: (a) Chronic toxicological adverse effects; (b) Acute pharmacological effects on consumers and on the microflora of the gastrointestinal tract of consumers; (c) Allergic reactions. Different types of controls and monitoring programme may be justified where the risk assessment identifies one or more of these other end-points as being significant for human health. Detections of non-compliant residues (e.g. those exceeding applicable MRLs) justify regulatory follow up. Animals and/or production systems can be exposed to a variety of veterinary drugs and other chemicals that may as a result be present in the products derived from them. Their importance for consumer health protection, however, varies with type and source. An understanding of the circumstances required for each veterinary drug input to actually pose a risk to consumers of animal products, along with an estimate of the relative likelihood of this occurring, is essential to determine the appropriate controls and verification programmes which should be included in the design of national residue control and verification programmes. The application of a control and verification programme based on risk should provide the necessary basis for exporting countries to certify, where required, the safety of exported food, and for importing countries, subject to any additional assessment they deem necessary, to accept such consignments. The same principles should apply to export assurance programmes as are applied to the design and implementation of national assurance programmes. 5. DEFINITIONS (FOR THE PURPOSES OF THESE GUIDELINES) Competent Authority(ies) means the official government organisation/agency(ies) having jurisdiction1. Approved means officially authorised or recognised by a competent authority. Based on risk means focussed on and proportionate to an estimate of the probability and severity of an adverse effect occurring in consumers. Risk profiles are defined in the Codex Procedural Manual. For veterinary drugs they relate a production system to a potential consumer health risk. They are the basis for approvals and use restrictions. System verification means obtaining overall information on the extent of application of the practices and controls. Risk targeted verification programmes means inspection/audit and/or sampling/laboratory analysis of specific suppliers or products aimed at the detection of non-compliance. 1 Definition used in the Guidelines for the Production, Processing, Labelling and Marketing of Organically Produced Foods (CAC/GL 32-1999). -- 5 of 42 -- CAC/GL 71-2009 6 Non-biased sampling refers to the random sampling of specified populations to provide information about the occurrence of residue non-compliances, typically on an annual, national basis. Compounds selected for non-biased sampling are usually based on risk profiles and the availability of laboratory methods suitable for regulatory purposes. The results of non-biased sampling are a measure of the effectiveness and appropriateness of the controls and practices within a wider segment of the production system. Survey refers to the collection of additional data aimed at the investigation of residues linked to a specific veterinary drug use or production type. Withdrawal time/ Withholding time (food harvest restriction) are defined in the Codex Glossary of Terms and Definitions (Veterinary Drugs Residues in Foods) (CAC/MISC 5-1993). A period of time may also be represented by a combination of events or other factors. Production system means the methods or activities used to produce food for human consumption. Quality control (in residue laboratories) means monitoring those factors associated with the analysis of a sample by a tester. Quality assurance (in residue laboratories) means independent review to ensure that the analytical programme is performing in an acceptable manner. Quality management system ensures that a laboratory is managed and operated in a manner that meets the requirements of an internationally recognized quality standard to produce quality data and results (e.g. ISO 17025: 2005). 6. REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 6.1 Roles Business operators/commercial entities involved in the production, processing and marketing of food have the primary responsibility for ensuring food safety. Competent Authorities regulate the use of veterinary drugs, verify that appropriate practices are applied and that effective measures are in place within the veterinary drug distribution and food production system to provide effective protection of consumers and facilitate trade, consistent with the goals of Codex Alimentarius. The competent authority responsible for providing consumer assurances for foods must ensure that it has sufficient knowledge of and control over veterinary drugs that are being sold and used within the production systems and that it has sufficient knowledge of food safety. 6.2 Approval by competent authority 6.2.1 Criteria Appropriate official approval criteria should be established. These criteria may include the acceptance of the assessments of other recognised competent authorities where use patterns are likely to be similar. Approval systems should: (a) Require an evaluation of the human safety of residues of the veterinary drug relying on a risk analysis and establishing, where appropriate, maximum residue limits; (b) Take into account the n