GUIDELINES FOR THE CONTROL OF NONTYPHOIDAL SALMONELLA SPP. IN BEEF AND PORK MEAT CAC/GL 87-2016 -- 1 of 36 -- CAC/GL 87-2016 2 1. INTRODUCTION Salmonellosis is one of the most frequently reported foodborne diseases worldwide, with beef and pork meat considered important food vehicles. The burden of the disease and the cost of control measures are significant in many countries and contamination with zoonotic nontyphoidal Salmonella1 has the potential to disrupt trade between countries. The large degree of variation exhibited by Salmonella in their biological properties, host preferences, and environmental survival presents a particular challenge for controlling the presence of Salmonella in animal production. In practice, this means that there is no “one size fits all” solution, and different production systems may require different approaches to control the various serovars of Salmonella. These Guidelines apply a risk management framework (RMF) approach as advocated in Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (MRM) (CAC/GL 63-2007). “Preliminary Risk Management Activities” and “Identification and Selection of Risk Management Options” are represented by the guidance developed for control measures at each step in the food chain. The following sections on “Implementation” and “Monitoring” complete the application of all the components of the RMF. The Guidelines build on general food hygiene provisions already established in the Codex system and propose potential control measures specific for Salmonella strains of public health relevance in beef and pork meat. In this context, the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) is committed to develop standards that are based on sound science2. Potential control measures for application at single or multiple steps of the food chain are presented in the following categories:  Good hygienic practice (GHP) – based: They are generally qualitative in nature and are based on empirical scientific knowledge and experience. They are usually prescriptive and may differ among countries.  Hazard – based: They are developed from scientific knowledge of the likely level of control of a hazard at a step (or series of steps) in a food chain. They are based on a quantitative base estimate in the prevalence and/or concentration of Salmonella, and can be validated as to their efficacy in hazard control at a specific step. The benefit of a hazard-based measure cannot be exactly determined without a specific risk assessment; however, any significant reduction in pathogen prevalence and / or concentration is expected to provide a certain level of human health benefit. Examples of control measures that are based on quantitative levels of hazard control have been subjected to a rigorous scientific evaluation in development of the Guidelines. Such examples are illustrative only and their use and approval may vary amongst member countries. Their inclusion in the Guidelines illustrates the value of a quantitative approach to hazard reduction throughout the food chain. The Guidelines are presented in a flow diagram format so as to enhance practical application of a primary production-to-consumption approach to food safety. This format:  Demonstrates the range of the approaches of control measures for Salmonella.  Illustrates relationships between control measures applied at different steps in the food chain.  Highlights data gaps in terms of scientific justification / validation for control measures.  Facilitates development of hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) plans at individual establishments and at national levels.  Assists in judging the equivalence3 of control measures for beef and pork meat applied in different countries.  Illustrates the interdependent relationship between Codex guidelines and OIE standards throughout the food chain. These Guidelines do not deal with matters of animal health unless directly related to food safety or suitability. In doing so, the Guidelines provide flexibility for use at the national (and individual processing) level. 1 Human pathogens of public health relevance only. For the purposes of this document, all references to Salmonella relate only to human pathogens. 2 Strategic Goal 2 of the Strategic Plan of the Codex Alimentarius Commission is to “Ensure the application of risk analysis principles in the development of Codex standards” and the CAC Procedural Manual states that “Health and safety aspects of Codex decisions and recommendations should be based on a risk assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances”. 3 Guidelines on the Judgement of Equivalence of Sanitary Measures Associated with Food Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 53-2003). -- 2 of 36 -- CAC/GL 87-2016 3 2. OBJECTIVES These Guidelines provide information to governments and industry on the control of nontyphoidal Salmonella in beef and pork meat that aim to reduce foodborne disease whilst ensuring fair practices in the international food trade. The Guidelines provide a scientifically sound international tool for robust application of GHP- and hazard-based approaches for control of Salmonella in beef and pork meat according to national risk management decisions. The control measures that are selected can vary between countries and production systems. The Guidelines do not set quantitative limits for Salmonella in beef and pork meat in international trade. Rather, the Guidelines follow the example of the overarching Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005) and provide an “enabling” framework which countries can utilize to establish control measures appropriate to their national situation. 3. SCOPE AND USE OF THE GUIDELINES 3.1. Scope These Guidelines are applicable to all nontyphoidal Salmonella that may contaminate beef and pork meat and cause foodborne disease. The primary focus is to provide information on practices that may be used to prevent, reduce, or eliminate nontyphoidal Salmonella in fresh4 beef and pork meat. Other measures, in addition to those described here, may be needed to control Salmonella in offal. These Guidelines in conjunction with the relevant OIE standards can apply from primary production-to- consumption for beef and pork meat produced in commercial production systems. 3.2. Use The Guidelines provide specific guidance for control of nontyphoidal Salmonella in beef and pork meat according to a primary production-to-consumption food chain approach, with potential control measures being considered at each step, or group of steps, in the process flow. The Guidelines are supplementary to and should be used in conjunction with the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005), the Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CAC/RCP 54-2004) and the Guidelines for the Validation of Food Safety Control Measures (CAC/GL 69-2008). These general and overarching provisions are referenced as appropriate and their content is not duplicated in these Guidelines. The primary production section of these Guidelines is supplementary to and should be used in conjunction with relevant chapters of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code5. The Guidelines systematically present GHP-based control measures. GHPs are pre-requisites to making choices on hazard-based control measures. Hazard-based measures will likely vary at the national level and therefore these Guidelines only provide examples of hazard-based controls. Examples of hazard-based control measures are limited to those that have been scientifically demonstrated as effective. Countries should note that these hazard-based control measures are indicative only. The quantifiable outcomes reported for control measures are specific to the conditions of particular studies and would need to be validated under local commercial conditions to provide an estimate of hazard reduction6. Government and industry can use choices on hazard-based control measures to inform decisions on critical control points (CCPs) when applying HACCP principles to a particular food process. Several hazard-based control measures as presented in these Guidelines are based on the use of physical, chemical and biological decontaminants to reduce the prevalence of Salmonella positive carcasses and/or its concentration on positive carcasses. The use of these control measures is subject to approval by the competent authority, where appropriate. Also these Guidelines do not preclude the choice of any other hazard- based control measure that is not included in the examples provided herein, and that may have been scientifically validated as being effective in a commercial setting. Provision of flexibility in application of the Guidelines is an important attribute. They are primarily intended for use by government risk managers and industry in the design and implementation of food safety control systems. The control measures are articulated in this guideline at appropriate steps, however if they could be performed hygienically and effectively they could be applied in other steps in the food chain. 4 Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005) 5 http://www.oie.int/en/international-standard-setting/terrestrial-code/access-online/ 6 FAO/WHO 2009. Risk characterization of microbiological hazards in food. Microbiological risk assessment series 17. Available at http://www.fao.org/docrep/012/i1134e/i1134e00.htm and http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/risk- characterization/en/ -- 3 of 36 -- CAC/GL 87-2016 4 The Guidelines should be useful when comparing, or judging equivalence of, different food safety measures for beef and pork meat in different countries. 4. DEFINITIONS Cattle: Animals of the species of Bos indicus, Bos taurus, and Bubalus bubalis. Lairage: Pens, yards and other holding areas used for accommodating animals in order to give them necessary attention (such as water, feed, rest) before they are moved on or used for specific purposes including slaughter. Nontyphoidal Salmonella: Serovars belonging to the species Salmonella enterica excluding the typhoidal serovars of subspecies enterica: serovar Typhi, serovar Paratyphi var. A, B and C, and serovar Sendai7. Pigs: Animals of the species Sus scrofa domesticus. 5. PRINCIPLES APPLYING TO CONTROL OF SALMONELLA IN BEEF AND PORK MEAT Overarching principles for good hygienic practice for meat production are presented in the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005), Section 4: General Principles of Meat Hygiene. Two principles that have particularly been taken into account in these Guidelines are: a) The principles of food safety risk analysis should be incorporated wherever possible and appropriate in the control of Salmonella in beef and pork meat from primary production-to-consumption. b) Wherever possible and practical, competent authorities should formulate risk management metrics8 so as to objectively express the level of control of Salmonella in beef and pork meat that is required to meet public health goals. 6. PRIMARY PRODUCTION-TO-CONSUMPTION APPROACH TO CONTROL MEASURES 7. SPECIFIC CONTROL MEASURES (PRIMARY PRODUCTION) 8. SPECIFIC CONTROL MEASURES (PROCESSING) 9. SPECIFIC CONTROL MEASURES (DISTRIBUTION CHANNELS) Sections 6 through 9 contain beef and pork specific measures. The beef Sections 6 to 9 are found in Annex I and the pork Sections 6 to 9 are found in Annex II. 10. CONTROL MEASURES GHP provides the foundation for most food safety control systems. Where possible and practicable, food safety control systems should incorporate hazard-based control measures and risk assessment. Identification and implementation of risk-based control measures based on risk assessment can be elaborated by application of a risk management framework (RMF) process as advocated in the Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (MRM) (CAC/GL 63-2007). While these Guidelines provide generic guidance on development of GHP-based and hazard-based control measures for Salmonella, development of risk-based control measures for application at single or multiple steps in the food chain are primarily the domain of competent authorities at the national level. Industry may derive risk-based measures to facilitate application of process control systems. 10.1. Development of risk-based control measures Competent authorities operating at the national level should develop risk-based control measures for Salmonella where possible and practical. When risk-modelling tools are developed, the risk manager needs to understand the capability and limitations9. When developing risk-based control measures, competent authorities may use the quantitative examples of the likely level of control of a hazard in this document. 7 The zoonotic serovars S. Java and S. Miami share antigenic structure with S. Paratyphi B and S. Sendai, respectively, and confusion should be avoided. 8 Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (MRM) (CAC/GL 63-2007). 9 Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Assessment (CAC/GL 30-1999). -- 4 of 36 -- CAC/GL 87-2016 5 Competent authorities formulating risk management metrics10 as regulatory control measures should apply a methodology that is scientifically robust and transparent. 11. IMPLEMENTATION OF CONTROL MEASURES Implementation11 involves giving effect to the selected control measure(s), development of implementation plan, communication on the decision on control measure(s), ensuring a regulatory framework and infrastructure for implementation exists, and a monitoring and evaluation process to assess whether the control measure(s) have been properly implemented. 11.1 Prior to Validation Prior to validation of the hazard-based control measures for Salmonella, the following tasks should be completed:  Identification of the specific measure or measures to be validated. This would include consideration of any measures agreed to by the competent authority and whether any measure has already been validated in a way that is applicable and appropriate to specific commercial use, such that further validation is not necessary.  Identification of any existing food safety outcome or target, established by the competent authority or industry. Industry may set stricter targets than those set by the competent authority. 11.2 Validation Validation of measures may be carried out by industry and/or the competent authority. Where validation is undertaken for a measure based on hazard control for Salmonella, evidence will need to be obtained to show that the measure is capable of controlling Salmonella to a specified target or outcome. This may be achieved by use of a single measure or a combination of measures. The Guidelines for the Validation of Food Safety Control Measures (CAC/GL 69-2008) (Section VI) provides detailed advice on the validation process. 11.3 Implementation Refer to the Section 