PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR THE ASSESSMENT AND USE OF VOLUNTARY THIRD-PARTY ASSURANCE PROGRAMMES CXG 93-2021 Adopted in 2021. -- 1 of 7 -- CXG 93-2021 2 A. PREAMBLE 1. Food business operators (FBOs) have the primary role and responsibility for managing the food safety of their products and for complying with regulatory requirements relating to food under their control. Competent Authorities require FBOs to demonstrate that they have effective controls and procedures in place to protect the health of consumers and ensure fair practices in food trade. Many FBOs use quality assurance systems, including voluntary third-party assurance (vTPA) programmes to reduce supply chain risks and confirm food safety outcomes. 2. The Codex Principles and Guidelines for National Food Control Systems1 foresee competent authorities taking into account quality assurance systems in their national food control system (NFCS). Competent authorities may choose to do this by establishing an arrangement with a vTPA owner to use the information/data generated by vTPA programme to support their regulatory controls. In any case, they should satisfy themselves that any information/data they intend to use is both reliable and fit for purpose. 3. These guidelines are intended to assist competent authorities in their consideration of vTPA programmes. They provide a framework and criteria for assessing the integrity and credibility of the governance structures of vTPA programmes and the reliability of information/data generated by such programmes to support NFCS objectives. When carrying out such an assessment, competent authorities should be guided by their intended use of the vTPA programme information/data and should only apply assessment criteria that are relevant to that purpose. 4. Reliable vTPA programme information/data may be used in general to better risk-profile sectors, and in some circumstances individual FBOs. This may lead to smarter data-driven prioritisation of official resources, while FBOs participating in robust vTPA programmes may benefit through an appropriate risk-based reduction in the frequency/intensity of regulatory controls e.g. inspection, sampling. Conversely, poorly performing FBOs, or sectors, may be subject to increased official regulatory controls based on trends identified through the information/data shared by the vTPA owner. B. SCOPE 5. These guidelines are intended to assist competent authorities within their national boundaries in the effective assessment and transparent use of reliable vTPA programme information/data in support of their NFCS objectives. 6. The guidelines focus on the structure, governance and components of vTPA programmes that align with and support NFCS objectives relating to protecting consumer health and ensuring fair practices in food trade. 7. The guidelines do not oblige competent authorities to use vTPA programme outcomes nor do they mandate the use of vTPA programme information/data from FBOs i.e. emphasising that the decision to use vTPA programme information/data by the competent authority is voluntary. 8. The guidelines do not apply to official inspection systems or official certification systems administered by government agencies having a regulatory or enforcement jurisdiction, nor officially recognised inspection or certification bodies2 that certify to a regulatory standard for which compliance is mandatory. 9. The guidelines are not intended to apply to private standards that are the subject of commercial contractual arrangements between buyers and sellers, nor do they apply to components of vTPA programmes which are outside the scope or requirements of the competent authority. 10. These guidelines do not constitute approval, recognition or endorsement of vTPA programmes. Competent authorities may choose approaches other than those described in these guidelines when considering how to take into account vTPA programmes information/data in their risk-based targeting of regulatory controls. C. DEFINITIONS3 For the purposes of this document, the following definitions apply: Assessment: A process of determining the presence or absence of a certain condition or component, or the degree to which a condition is fulfilled. (CXG 91-2017) Accreditation: third party attestation related to a conformity assessment body conveying formal demonstration of its competence to carry out specific tasks. (Adapted from ISO.IEC 17000:2020) Accreditation body: authoritative body that performs accreditation (Adapted from ISO.IEC 17000:2020) 1 CXG 82-2013: Principles and Guidelines for National Food Control Systems. 2 CXG 20-1995: Principles for Food Import and Export Certification. 3 Based (in part) on EN ISO/IEC 17000 ‘Conformity assessment – Vocabulary and general principles’ -- 2 of 7 -- CXG 93-2021 3 Audit: is a systematic and functionally independent examination to determine whether activities and related results comply with planned objectives. (CXG 20-1995) Certification body: Third party conformity assessment body operating certification services. (Adapted from: ISO/IEC 17065:2012). Conformity assessment: demonstration that specified requirements are fulfilled. (Adapted from ISO.IEC 17000:2020) Governance: the processes and arrangements through which organizations are administered, in particular how they are directed, controlled and led including the way management systems are structured and separated to avoid potential conflicts. Inspection: is the examination of food or systems for control of food, raw materials, processing, and distribution including in-process and finished product testing, in order to verify that they conform to requirements. (CXG 20-1995) Review: verification of the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of selection and determination activities, and the results of these activities, with regard to fulfilment of specified requirements. (Adapted from ISO.IEC 17000:2020) Specified requirement: need or expectation that is stated. (Adapted from ISO.IEC 17000:2020) vTPA Standard: specified requirements contained in the vTPA programme. Voluntary Third-Party Assurance Programme: An autonomous scheme comprising of the ownership of a standard that may utilise national/international requirements; a governance structure for certification and conformity assessment that provides for periodic onsite audits of FBO operations for conformity with the standard, and in which FBO participation is voluntary. vTPA Owner: Person or organisation responsible for developing and maintaining a specific vTPA programme. (Adapted from ISO IEC 17065:2012) D. PRINCIPLES 11. When considering the potential role of vTPA programmes and the potential contribution their information/data may make to FBO compliance with regulatory requirements and broader NFCS objectives, competent authorities should be guided by the following principles: Principle 1 Planning and decision making  Competent authorities retain discretion whether and how to consider information/data from vTPA programmes in their regulatory oversight, inspection and control framework, planning and decision-making process. Principle 2 Role and responsibilities  Competent authorities remain responsible for maintaining appropriate oversight of the implementation of regulatory requirements and controls including enforcement actions regardless of the participation of FBOs in vTPA programmes. Principle 3 Transparency of policies and processes  Any arrangement to use vTPA programme information/data to support NFCS objectives, including the assessment criteria, should be based on transparent policies and processes in line with Principle 3 of CXG 82- 20134. Principle 4 Regulatory framework  The vTPA standard, its audit and inspection does not replace regulatory requirements or controls carried out by the competent authority and could be complementary to the regulatory controls. Principle 5 Proportionality  The depth and extent of any assessment of the vTPA programme should be commensurate with the intended use of the vTPA programme information/data. 4 All aspects of a national food control system should be transparent and open to scrutiny by all stakeholders, while respecting legal requirements to protect confidential information as appropriate. Transparency considerations apply to all participants in the food chain and this can be achieved through clear documentation and communication. -- 3 of 7 -- CXG 93-2021 4 Principle 6 Confidentiality  Competent authorities should ensure the confidentiality of information/data shared by vTPA owners in line with the relevant legal requirements in their countries. Principle 7 Avoiding burdens on food business operators  The processes and policies of the competent authority to make use of vTPA programme information/data should not directly or indirectly mandate additional requirements, costs or restrictions on FBOs over and above regulatory requirements. E. ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND RELEVANT ACTIVITIES 12. The roles and responsibilities of all participants along the food chain should not change as a result of any decision by a competent authority to take account of reliable vTPA programme information/data in their NFCS relating to protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in the food trade. 1) Competent Authorities a. Have statutory responsibilities for regulatory requirements set down in the NFCS, as recommended in CXG 82-2013. b. May consider using information/data generated by vTPA programmes to support meeting the objectives of their NFCS. c. Establish and implement regulatory controls, including frequency/intensity, and enforcement action for all FBOs regardless of whether a FBO participates in a vTPA programme. d. Should clearly describe the use of a vTPA programme information/data within their NFCS. e. Should ensure any arrangements to use vTPA programme information/data is fully transparent. f. Should have mechanisms in place to verify the continued credibility and reliability of vTPA programme information/data. g. Should recognize potential conflicts of interest and their impact on the reliability of the information/data of the vTPA programme. h. Should maintain the confidentiality of information/data shared by the vTPA owner, according to the legislative framework of the country. 2) Food Business Operators (FBOs) a. Have the primary role and responsibility for managing the food safety of their products and for complying with regulatory requirements relating to food under their control. b. Need to demonstrate that they have effective controls and procedures in place to address regulatory requirements. c. May elect to participate in vTPA programmes to meet business needs, demonstrate conformity with relevant food safety standards, and provide independent assurance of the integrity of their products or production systems to relevant stakeholders. d. Owns the information/data generated by the vTPA programme. e. Has no conflicts of interest with the operation of the vTPA programme. 3) Voluntary Third-Party Assurance Owners a. Are responsible for implementing the governance arrangements of a vTPA programme, which may include utilising national/international standards and independent accredited audit and certification. b. Are accountable to participating FBOs to disclose the potential sharing of information/data generated by the vTPA programme with competent authorities. c. Have mechanisms to share information/data with the competent authority, according to the process established by the vTPA owners and the competent authority. d. Have policies and processes when sharing vTPA programme information/data with competent authorities such as notification to the FBO. e. Have policies and processes to alert the competent authority of any significant public health risks or consumer deception associated with non-conformities by the FBO(s). f. Have policies and processes in place to protect against potential conflicts of interest between vTPA owners, auditors and FBOs, and be able to demonstrate adherence to data protection obligations. -- 4 of 7 -- CXG 93-2021 5 F. CRITERIA TO ASSESS THE CREDIBILITY AND INTEGRITY OF vTPA PROGRAMMES 13. Competent authorities that choose to use information/data from vTPA programmes to inform their NFCS should satisfy themselves that the vTPA programme information/data can be trusted and is fit for purpose. In order to do this, they may carry out a full or partial assessment of the credibility and integrity of the vTPA programme, commensurate with their intended use of the vTPA programme information/data. When carrying out such an assessment, competent authorities should select the criteria below that are appropriate to the extent of their intended use of the vTPA programme as a start point for this assessment and ensure that the vTPA programme has implemented them in a comprehensive way to assure successful outcomes. 1) Governance Arrangements a. Are the governance arrangements and responsibilities within the vTPA programme clearly defined and documented? b. Are the oversight arrangements structured to avoid potential conflicts of interest? c. Does the vTPA programme have management controls to ensure consistent and effective implementation and maintenance? d. Does the vTPA programme have an accreditation arrangement with an accreditation body with international standing5, recognition and credibility? If not, how does the vTPA owner ensure that certification bodies have the capacity and competency to perform effectively?” 2) Accreditation of Certification Bodies a. Does the vTPA programme have an independent process to ensure the use of appropriately accredited certification bodies? b. Is the certification body accredited for the vTPA programme according to the relevant accreditation standard? c. Is the accreditation of certification bodies for the vTPA programme subject to a periodic review and renewal? d. Does the accreditation body assess the certification body for the vTPA programme using relevant and internationally recognized standards6? 3) Standard Setting Process a. Do the vTPA owners set their own standards or utilise national or international standards for assurance? b. To what extent are the vTPA standards consistent with Codex or other relevant international standards and/or applicable national regulatory requirements? c. Do the vTPA standards contain specified requirements to protect consumers in relation to food safety and fair practices in food trade? d. Have the vTPA standards been developed through a transparent consultative process with relevant experts and stakeholders reflecting the range of business processes within the target sector? e. Are the vTPA standards open, transparent in governance and subject to continuous improvement by regular review to keep them up to date? f. Are the vTPA standards written in a way that they can be assessed for conformity? 4) Conformity Assessment a. Does the vTPA programme have written procedures on frequency, me