CAC/GL 31 Page 1 of 32 GUIDELINES FOR THE SENSORY EVALUATION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN LABORATORIES CAC-GL 31-1999 I. SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF THE GUIDELINES II. FACILITIES FOR SENSORY EVALUATION 2.1 General Observations 2.2 Laboratories for Sensory Evaluation 2.2.1 Location and Layout 2.2.2 Preparation Area 2.2.3 Evaluation Area 2.2.4 Equipment III. PROCEDURES FOR SENSORY EVALUATION 3.1 Collecting and Transporting Samples 3.2 Preparation of Samples for Examination 3.3 Cooking 3.4 Procedures for the Assessment of Products 3.4.1 Assessment of Raw Products 3.4.2 Assessment of Frozen Products 3.4.3 Assessment of Cooked Samples IV. TRAINING OF ASSESSORS 4.1 Objective Sensory Training 4.1.1 Consideration for Objective Sensory Training 4.1.2 Selection of Candidate Assessors 4.1.2 Screening for Perception of Basic Tastes 4.1.2.2 Screening for Perception of Odours 4.1.2.3 Screening for Normal Colour Perception 4.1.2.4 Screening Test for the Assessment of Texture 4.1.3 Training of Assessors 4.1.4 Monitoring of Assessors 4.1.5 Reference Documents 4.2 Preparation and Handling of Samples 4.2.1 Type of Samples 4.2.2 Preparation of Sample Packs 4.2.3 Characteristics of Samples 4.2.3.1 Sensory Attributes 4.2.3.2 Chemical Attributes -- 1 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 2 of 32 Annex I Examples of Attributes of Fishery Products Used in Sensory Evaluation Annex II Examples of Test Methods Which Would be Appropriate for Use Annex III Suggested Syllabus for a Training Course for Assessors in the Sensory Assessment of Fish and Fishery Products Appendix I Definitions of Terms used in Sensory Analysis of Seafood Appendix II Reference documents -- 2 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 3 of 32 GUIDELINES FOR THE SENSORY EVALUATION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN LABORATORIES I. SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF THE GUIDELINES The guidelines are intended to be used by analysts who need to apply sensory methods when using criteria based on sensory attributes of the products. Although the guidelines have been written with the Codex requirements in mind they include some provisions for products not covered by these standards but where sensory evaluation is used in the testing of fishery products for conformity requirements.1 These guidelines are to be used for sensory examination of samples in a laboratory to determine defects by procedures, including cooking, which are not normally done by analysts in the field. Technical information is provided on the laboratory facilities used for such analyses and training of analysts. The objective of guidelines is to ensure uniformity of application of standards by making recommendations for inspection purposes concerning the facilities required in sensory testing and the procedures for carrying out sensory tests. For the purpose of this document the use of fish means finfish, crustaceans, and molluscs. II. FACILITIES FOR SENSORY EVALUATION 2.1 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS Sensory evaluation should be carried out by adequately trained personnel (see Section IV). They evaluate a specialized range of products, and use one sensory methodology. 2.2 LABORATORIES FOR SENSORY EVALUATION 2.2.1 Location and Layout Figure 1 illustrates a plan of a laboratory that would be suitable for use for examining fishery products. The plan illustrates the principle that the preparation area should be separate from the evaluation area. Office accommodation, storage rooms, staff facilities, and possibly other test facilities should be provided elsewhere in the premises. The evaluation area must not be used for chemical and microbiological analyses however, some types of analyses could be done in the preparation area. 2.2.2 Preparation Area This area is to used for the handling and storage of fishery products, and for the preparation of samples for sensory evaluation. It should be constructed so as to comply with the requirements of good manufacture practices for the design and construction of fishery establishments. The rooms should be designed to ensure cooking odours do not interfere with sensory analysis. 1 Additional criteria may be included if new recommendations are made by the Committee -- 3 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 4 of 32 2.2.3 Evaluation Area There should be no preparation of products in this area other than final trimming of samples prior to cooking. The area, ventilation, procedures and sample sequence should be organized to minimize disturbing sensory stimuli. Also influence and disturbances from fellow evaluators and other personnel should be minimized. The colour of evaluation area should be neutral. The working surfaces should be illuminated by daylight or artificial daylight. Any specific conditions in standards should be met. -- 4 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 5 of 32 -- 5 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 6 of 32 2.2.4 Equipment The exact type and amount of equipment required will depend to some extent on the nature of products to be inspected and the volume and frequency of the examinations. III. PROCEDURES FOR SENSORY EVALUATION 3.1 COLLECTING AND TRANSPORTING SAMPLES In most circumstances where fishery products are subjected to sensory evaluation a decision is made about a batch of fish, for example, acceptance or rejection of a consignment of imported products, classification of batches of fish on a market into freshness grades. The decision is made on the basis of an examination of a sample drawn from the batch according to guidelines which will usually specify how a sample is to be taken for the intended regulatory or commercial purpose of the examination. When collecting a sample for inspection the inspector should ensure that the procedures used for taking the sample, and the subsequent handling of the sample, do not materially affect its sensory properties. The inspector should check that the sample is properly packed and where necessary, under temperature control before dispatching it to the inspection laboratory. If the sample is not under the supervision of officials during transport the inspector should ensure that sample can not be tampered with during the journey. On receipt at the inspection laboratory, samples, if not evaluated immediately, should be stored under appropriate conditions. However fresh and chilled products should be examined on the day they are received. Products in either chill or frozen storage should be appropriately wrapped to prevent drying out or desiccation. 3.2 PREPARATION OF SAMPLES FOR EXAMINATION Table 1 in Annex 1presents attributes useful in evaluating some species and products. Procedures for preparation of samples should be appropriate for the product types. Some procedures relative to fresh or frozen finfish are described in the following paragraphs. The fish, if entire, should be gutted and the guts retained. The head should be removed, and the fillet from one side to taken off. The portions should be assembled on tray for analysis. QF Products can be laid out on the examination bench in the evaluation area, but it is often more convenient for presentation and for clearing up after if sample units are presented on trays. Frozen products should be first examined in the frozen state. The complete sample unit or portions of the unit should then be thawed for sensory evaluation. Whether the sample can, or should be subdivided, depends on the nature of the products. Packs of IQF shrimps or fillets can be opened and subsamples taken. Portions could be sawn off large fish or off blocks, but this might be difficult in the case of thick material unless a bandsaw is available. -- 6 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 7 of 32 Frozen material should be thawed out as quickly as possible, but without raising the temperature of all or part of the product so that it might spoil. The simplest procedure is to spread out the sample units on the benches and tables in the preparation area and leave them to thaw at ambient temperature. They should be covered to prevent drying and contamination. The progress of thawing should be monitored and when it is judged that thawing is complete the products should be evaluated, or transferred to a refrigerator. Products should be covered with plastic film before storing in the refrigerator. Storage should be limited in order to maintain sample integrity. If possible sample units should be thawed out on trays so that the amount and nature of the thaw drip can be assessed. Thawing can be accelerated by immersion of the material in water. This is acceptable if product is protected from the contact with water by suitable wrappings, or if contact with water does not materially affect the sensory properties of the product. Care must be taken to prevent further spoilage or bacterial growth. Small sample units such as IQF fillets or small packs of shrimps or shellfish meats could be thawed in a microwave cooker on the defrost setting, but care must be taken not to use too high power settings otherwise parts of the material will be overheated. Large frozen fish or large blocks of frozen products will take many hours to thaw out at ambient temperature, longer than a normal working day, and they can not be properly monitored throughout the whole process of thawing. One solution is to lay the products out for thawing at the end of a working day when they will just be completely, or almost completely, thawed by the following morning. Alternatively the material can be put out to thaw as early as possible in the day and transferred to a chill room at the end of the day to complete the process at low temperature. It is helpful to break apart blocks of product when they are partially thawed to accelerate thawing if this can be done without damaging the material. 3.3 COOKING In cases where a final decision on odour or gelatinous state cannot be made in the thawed uncooked state, a small portion of the disputed material (approximately 200g) is sectioned from the sample unit and the odour and flavour or gelatinous condition confirmed by cooking without delay by one of the following cooking methods. The following procedures are based on heating the product to an internal temperature of 65 - The product must not be overcooked. Cooking times vary according to the size of the product and the temperatures used. The exact times and conditions of cooking for the products should be determined by prior experimentation. Baking Procedure: Wrap the product in aluminum foil and place it evenly on a flat cookie sheet or shallow flat pan. Steaming Procedure: Wrap the product in aluminum foil and place it on a wire rack suspended over boiling water in a covered container. Boil-in-Bag Procedure: Place the product in a boilable film-type pouch and seal. Immerse the pouch in boiling water and cook. Microwave Procedure: Enclose the product in a container suitable for microwave cooking. If plastic bags are used, check to ensure that no odour is imparted from the plastic bags. Cook according to equipment instructions.2 2 General Standard for Quick Frozen Fish Fillets, Annex A “Sensory and Physical Examination” -- 7 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 8 of 32 3.4 PROCEDURES FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF PRODUCTS Standards and specifications for fishery products will specify the features of the product that are able to be evaluated, and the criteria for accepting or rejecting products or for allocating them to grades. Table 1 presented in Annex I lists sensory attributes and criteria which may apply to standards and quality grading schemes. In order to apply quality criteria consistently in the inspection of products it is necessary to conduct the sensory assessments in a consistent and systematic manner. Samples should be assessed relative to the characteristics of the species concerned. Assessors must pay particular attention to those features of the product which are referred to in any standards and which determinate conformance to the standard, but in addition they should assess and record other relevant attributes of the samples, as appropriate. 3.4.1 Assessment of Raw Products Fresh fish will normally be assessed by appearance and odour. Fish change in appearance in a number of ways during spoilage in ice and it is not usually difficult to accurately grade iced fish by appearance alone. Characteristics to look for are listed in Table 1 of Annex I. 3.4.2 Assessment of Frozen Products Frozen fish should be examined in the frozen state. The assessor should note the nature and state of any wrappings and glazes and the product should be examined for any discolourations and for the extent and depth of any dehydration. The assessor should note if there are any signs that product might have been thawed and refrozen. Signs of slumping or distortion of blocks, the collection of frozen drip in pockets in the wrappings, (not to be confused with water that might have been present on the fish at the time of freezing), and the partial loss of glaze. Thawed samples should be presented and examined as for the corresponding unfrozen product where appropriate. It is not easy to evaluate the freshness of thawed whole fish by appearance because the freezing and thawing processes alter characteristics like the eyes, skin and colour of gills and blood. The gills have a leathery or slightly rancid odour even after short periods of frozen storage which have no significance for the quality of the product. 3.4.3 Assessment of Cooked Samples Cooked samples should be held in a closed container, allowed to cool to a comfortable tasting temperature, and kept warm unless they are assessed immediately. Products which have already been cooked, for example cooked shrimps, should be warmed up slightly. The assessor should note the appearance of the product and record any unusual features. The odour should be assessed and its character and strength recorded, particularly any unusual odours like chemical taints. Assessors should be encouraged to taste cooked samples as some compounds can only be detected by mouth (e.g. low levels of decomposition or fuel contamination). The flavor of a sample in the mouth should confirm the assessment based on odour, but can give additional information. For example most additives such as salt, sorbates, polyphosphates, are not detectable by odour, -- 8 of 32 -- CAC/GL 31 Page 9 of 32 but are detectable by taste. Sensory analysis alone should not be used to determine the presence of additives and any suspicion that non permitted additives have been used, or that excess amounts of permitted additives are present, should be confirmed by chemical analysis where appropriate. IV. TRAINING OF ASSESSORS 4.1 OBJECTIVE SENSORY TRAINING 4.1.1 Considerations for Objective Sensory Training In the sections below examples are provided of test materials which have been used for screening and training analysts. Objective sensory testing measures the intrinsic sensory attributes of a sample through the analytic sensory perceptions of human assessors. In order to conduct objective sensory analyses of fish and fish products, assessors must be selected for their ability to perform the sensory tasks r