CODEX ALIMENTARIUS GUIDELINE I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING THE STABILITY AND PURITY OF REFERENCE MATERIALS AND RELATED STOCK SOLUTIONS OF PESTICIDES DURING PROLONGED STORAGES CXG 106-2025 CXG 106-2025 ADOPTED 2025 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 14 -- History of the guideline Adopted in 2025. -- 2 of 14 -- 1 GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING THE STABILITY AND PURITY OF REFERENCE MATERIALS AND RELATED STOCK SOLUTIONS OF PESTICIDES DURING PROLONGED STORAGE (CXG 106-2025) 1 Preface Pesticide residues in agricultural crops and food commodities have become a worldwide food safety and trade concern, which has led to enforcement of strict pesticide regulations. More than 1 200 pesticides are available globally to control pests on different agricultural crops and food commodities. Analyses of pesticides at trace levels in the food chain require the use of specific reference materials (RMs) of known chemical purity manufactured by the reference material producers (RMPs) to ensure reliability of the test results. Accurate determination of pesticide residues in agricultural crops and food commodities is important for food safety control and fixation of maximum residue limits (MRLs) of pesticides, thereby overcoming the related trade barriers. RMs with specified purity are also required for accurate qualitative and quantitative analysis of pesticide active ingredient(s) in technical products, formulations and stock solutions. Limited shelf life, diminishing purity and high recurring cost of RMs act as major impediments to performing regular pesticide residue analysis. These problems are magnified for multi-pesticide residue analysis by testing laboratories in developing countries as they are required to allocate a large part of their funds for frequent procurement of expensive RMs. Furthermore, the use of RMs is restricted by the expiry dates specified by the RMPs in the reference material document (e.g. certificate of analysis (CoA) or product information sheet), which provides the value for purity, expiry date and measurement uncertainty of the RMs as per ISO 33401.1 Often, laboratories cannot afford the frequent purchase of high-cost RMs for their pesticide residue control work. Moreover, due to supply chain constraints, some laboratories may receive RMs close to their expiry date, as mentioned in the reference material document. In such situations, the laboratories are forced to buy new standards and prepare new stock solutions more frequently than necessary. This leads to enormous amount of work and increased laboratory costs. Additionally, shipping RMs by the suppliers to laboratories increases the acquisition time for procurement (a few weeks to months), creating hurdles in sustaining pesticide residue control programmes. There are many RMs that remain stable even after the expiry dates stated in the reference material document with no significant change in purity. Some studies have also reported that if RMs are stored in better storage conditions than recommended by the manufacturer, provided that these conditions do not contradict those indicated by the RMP in the reference material document, the RMs are stable for much longer than the expiry dates indicated by the RMPs. Such RMs may technically be allowed to be used beyond their expiry dates if laboratory checks are in place to demonstrate that they are stable and continue meeting the purity requirements. However, the absence of guidance procedures for monitoring the stability and purity of RMs prevents their use beyond the expiry dates under the ISO/IEC 170252 laboratory quality system. This document represents a crucial step towards developing comprehensive harmonized guidance enabling the laboratories to monitor the stability and purity of the pesticide RMs and their stock solutions during prolonged storage. The document aims to guide the laboratories in monitoring the stability and purity of RMs for their possible use beyond their expiry dates and for continued use of stock solutions that retain their stability and purity. 2 Scope and objective The purpose of this document is to furnish a framework that would assist the laboratories in monitoring the stability and purity of RMs of pesticides during prolonged storage and identifying expired RMs as indicated by the reference material document of RMPs but with demonstrated continuing stability and purity through -- 3 of 14 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS GUIDELINE robust analytical protocols so that such materials that retain their purity as per the reference material document even after expiry and may continue to be used as valid RMs. Another aspect of the proposed framework is to monitor the stability of the stock solutions used for pesticide residue analysis so that those solutions that are proven to be valid may be used for accurate and reliable determination of pesticide residue levels. This document applies to RMs of pesticide standards of known purity specified by a RMP, including individual RMs, stock solutions of individual RMs, and mixed pesticide standard solutions of RMs purchased from the RMPs or prepared by the laboratories from the individual RMs procured by the laboratories from the RMPs. These guidelines may enable the pesticide residue laboratories and pesticide quality control laboratories to overcome the constraints associated with short expiry periods of RMs as shown in the RMP documents and use them beyond their expiry dates as indicated by RMPs. After the expiration dates of RMPs, the RMs retaining the purity specified in the reference material document may be used as RMs or as quality control materials (QCM) for the analysis of pesticides, provided that these RMs are stored under desirable conditions (low temperature and dark conditions). RMs that do not remain stable and do not show acceptable purity during prolonged storage shall not be used by laboratories for pesticide residue testing/quantitative purposes, as accurate results may not be obtained. The guidelines cover the storage conditions that shall be maintained and quantitative measurements that shall be performed to monitor the stability and purity of RMs and their stock solutions before and beyond their expiration period. 3 General criteria The analysis shall be conducted in laboratories in compliance with the general criteria for testing laboratories laid down in ISO/IEC 17025,2 with the scope relevant to the measurement concerned. The RMs shall be procured from an RMP accredited as per ISO 170343 to ensure analytical traceability or from a National Metrology Institute recognized by peers or designated by countries. The stability of mixed pesticide standard solutions that may be evaluated under these guidelines include mixed pesticide standard solutions purchased from the RMP as well as mixed pesticide standard solutions prepared by pesticide residues laboratories by using RMs purchased from RMPs, who may certify the purity and stability of each of the individual components. To ensure metrological traceability, the analytical balances used shall be calibrated with weights traceable to national/international standards. Calibrated class A glassware or appropriate electronic/automatic pipettes traceable to national/international standards shall be used for volumetric measurements. The instrumentation used in purity tests should have comparable or greater sensitivity/specificity to those used in the reference material document of the RM. According to the reference material document, the equipment used for storing and monitoring RMs should be traceable to national/international standards. ISO Standard 334054 may be referred to for assessing the shelf-life of an RM -- 4 of 14 -- 3 GUIDELINES FOR MONITORING THE STABILITY AND PURITY OF REFERENCE MATERIALS AND RELATED STOCK SOLUTIONS OF PESTICIDES DURING PROLONGED STORAGE (CXG 106-2025) To ensure the validity of the stability and purity testing protocols provided below, gravimetric records shall be maintained for RMs (opened or unopened), both solid and liquid and their respective stock solutions during storage before and after use each time. Before recording the weight, the container should attain room temperature/ambient temperature and be wiped to remove any adhering moisture. The exposure of RM and stock solutions to ambient temperatures and light must be kept as short as absolutely necessary, limiting handling time. The record of the storage conditions (e.g. temperature and humidity) as well as the date of use of the RM and their stock solutions shall be maintained. Also, the temperature at which the RMs and their stock solutions are opened for use shall be recorded. Data logs and control charts shall be maintained by laboratories to document and evaluate the performance of storage equipment over time. 4 Recommended storage conditions for pesticide reference materials and their stock solutions The storage conditions of RMs are specified by RMPs in the reference material documents, as RMs are susceptible to degradation at high temperatures and other unfavourable environmental conditions. Environmental conditions (temperature and humidity, as appropriate) shall be recorded, monitored and controlled by the laboratory. If a laboratory maintains the RMs in storage conditions more protective than those recommended by the RMPs (i.e. temperature lower than recommended without exposure to light and moisture, duration of handling, frequency of use, etc.), the rate of degradation of the RMs is significantly minimized as long as these conditions do not contradict those indicated in the reference material document by the RMP. Under such conditions, the expiry date as recommended by the RMPs may be extended as appropriate for an RM by a date allowing for storage of up to ten years or as long as the purity mentioned in the reference material document holds well (≤ ± 10%) (SANTE, 2024).5 Another study revealed the stability of pesticide reference standards for up to 15 years or in-stock solutions for up to ten years. To avoid any cross-contamination or degradation of RMs, the vials may be placed in an airtight capped tube/ sealed pouch (made of suitable polypropylene or high-quality plastic material) and immediately stored in the freezer/refrigerator at conditions more protective than those recommended by RMPs, preferably at subzero temperature. The stock solutions must also be stored in airtight capped glassware or any other suitable type of vessels as specified by the RMP. Storage conditions shall be monitored, controlled and recorded with appropriately calibrated equipment. Exposing glassware to elevated temperatures should be avoided. -- 5 of 14 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS GUIDELINE 5 Analytical protocol for monitoring the stability and purity of pesticide reference materials and individual stock solutions Three analytical approaches may be considered for monitoring the stability and purity of individual RMs, RM stock solutions, and mixed pesticide standard solutions of RMs for the purpose of extending their use beyond the expiry date, provided their purity is proven acceptable. In Approach 1, the stability of new (or unexpired) and old (or expired) RMs is determined simultaneously. The comparisons of peak area shall be based on averaged values from repeated runs, which mitigates other sources of variation in instrument response. Alternatively, an internal standard (IS) may be used to compare the peak area ratio of new (or unexpired) and old (or expired) RMs. If the deviation (in peak area) after expiration date indicated by RMP is found within ± 10%, or alternatively the peak area ratio deviation is within ± 10%, the analyte in the old (or expired) RM is considered to be at an acceptable level and may therefore continue to be used as a valid RM. For neat standards and stock solutions, monitoring of stability and purity may be continued regularly up to a maximum of ten years (SANTE)5 provided the deviation in purity from the original RMP remains acceptable. Here, a new (or unexpired) RM would be required throughout the period of comparison. Approach 1 is applicable for individual neat standards and their related stock solutions. In Approach 2, whenever a new (or unexpired) RM is procured by any laboratory, its purity is monitored periodically before and after expiry using the same analytical conditions as mentioned in the reference material document. Here, new (or unexpired) RM need not be procured. An unexpired IS of any pesticide RM, appropriate for the method is used to account for any change in the response of the equipment. As the analyte is spiked with the IS, the selection of the IS should be based on previous experience that shows good stability over the expected storage time. The IS should not be susceptible to chemical degradation, should be insensitive to external factors such as light and moisture, chemically different from the analyte and should not interfere with the measurement of the tested analyte. This approach applies only to neat RMs accompanied by reference material documents. In Approach 3, three different methods have been proposed to monitor the purity of mixed pesticide standard solutions. In Method 3.1, the comparisons of peak area of each pesticide RM in new (or unexpired) and old (or expired) mixture shall be based on averaged values from repeated runs, which mitigates other sources of variation in instrument response, by averaging the values of replicate measurements. In the Method 3.2, an IS may be used to compare the peak area ratio of each RM pesticide in new (or unexpired) and old (or expired) mixture. If the deviation (in peak area) after expiration is found within ± 10% (Method 3.1), or the peak area ratio deviation is within ± 10% (Method 3.2), for each pesticide RM in the mixture, the analyte in the RM is considered at an acceptable level, and may therefore continue to be used as a valid RM. In Method 3.3, whenever a laboratory acquires a new (or unexpired) mixed pesticide standard from an RMP, its signal stability should be periodically monitored before and after the expiration date, employing analytical conditions as similar as possible to those indicated in the RM documentation. In this case, it is not necessary to acquire a new (or unexpired) mixed pesticide standard from an RMP. Instead, an unexpired IS, corresponding to any suitable pesticide RM for the method, is used to compensate for possible variations in instrumental response. In this procedure, the analyte peak area (or alternatively, the peak area ratio) for every pesticide in the mixture is plotted against storage time. Subsequently, linear regression analysis is applied to assess the presence of significant changes in the analyte area (or area ratio), in accordance with the classical stability study approach established in ISO 33405.4 If the regression analysis determines that the data do not show a linear trend (slope