GUIDELINES ON FORMULATED COMPLEMENTARY FOODS FOR OLDER INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN CAC/GL 8-1991 Adopted in 1991. Amended in 2017. Revised in 2013. -- 1 of 10 -- CAC/GL 8-1991 2 1. PURPOSE To provide guidance on nutritional and technical aspects of the production of Formulated Complementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children as defined in Section 3.1, including: i. Formulation of such foods, based on the nutritional requirements of older infants and young children; ii. Processing techniques; iii. Hygienic requirements; iv. Provisions for packaging; v. Provisions for labelling and instructions for use. 2. SCOPE The provisions of these Guidelines apply to Formulated Complementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children as defined in Section 3.1 below and include but are not limited to porridges containing cereals, ready-to-use products and food-based home fortificants. Micronutrient supplements, processed cereal based foods1, and canned baby foods2 are not covered by these Guidelines. These Guidelines should be used in accordance with the Global Strategy for Infants and Young Child Feeding and World Health Assembly Resolution WHA54.2 (2001). 3. DESCRIPTION 3.1 Formulated Complementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children means foods that are suitable for use during the complementary feeding period. These foods are specifically formulated with appropriate nutritional quality to provide additional energy and nutrients to complement the family foods derived from the local diet by providing those nutrients which are either lacking or are present in insufficient quantities. 3.2 Older infants means persons from the age of 6 months and not more than 12 months of age. 3.3 Young children means persons from the age of more than 12 months up to the age of three years (36 months). 3.4 Complementary feeding period means the period when older infants and young children transition from exclusive feeding of breastmilk and/or breastmilk substitutes to eating the family diet3. 4. SUITABLE RAW MATERIALS AND INGREDIENTS 4.1 Basic Raw Materials and Ingredients The following raw materials, most of which are locally available, are suitable ingredients for the production of Formulated Complementary Foods for older infants and young children under the specified conditions given below: 4.1.1 Cereals 4.1.1.1 All milled cereals suitable for human consumption may be used provided that they are processed in such a way as to reduce the fibre content, when necessary, and to decrease and, if possible, to eliminate anti- nutrients such as phytates, tannins or other phenolic materials, lectins, trypsin, and chymotrypsin inhibitors which can lower the protein quality and digestibility, amino acid bioavailability and mineral absorption. The use of appropriate enzymes may be considered to decrease fibre and anti-nutrients, if needed. 4.1.1.2 Besides carbohydrates (mainly consisting of starch) cereals contain a significant quantity of protein (8-12%) but are limiting in the amino acid lysine. Combining cereals with legumes and/or pulses, which are higher in lysine, can compensate for the limiting level in cereals. 4.1.2 Legumes and Pulses 4.1.2.1 Legumes and pulses, such as chick peas, lentils, peas, cowpeas, mungo beans, green gram, kidney beans and soya beans, containing at least 20% protein on a dry weight basis. 1 Standard for Processed Cereal-Based Foods for Infants and Young Children (CODEX STAN 74-1981) 2 Standard for Canned Baby Foods (CODEX STAN 73-1981) 3 According to the WHO, 2002, Complementary Feeding, Report of the Global Consultation appropriate complementary feedings should start from the age of six months with continued breast feeding up to two years or beyond ; refer also to WHO 2003 Guiding Principles for Complementary feeding of the breastfed child, WHO 2005 Guiding principles for feeding non-breastfed children 6-24 months of age. -- 2 of 10 -- CAC/GL 8-1991 3 4.1.2.2 On the whole, legumes and pulses are deficient in L-methionine. Depending on the nature of the other ingredients in the formulation, the addition of L-methionine may be desirable in order to improve the nutritional value of the product. 4.1.2.3 Legumes and pulses must be appropriately processed to reduce, as much as possible, the anti-nutritional factors normally present, such as phytate, lectins (haemagglutenins), trypsin and chymotrypsin inhibitors. When phytoestrogen containing legumes and pulses such as soya are added as an ingredient, products with low levels of phytoestrogens should be used.  Lectins can be reduced by moist heat treatment;  Trypsin inhibitor activity may be reduced to acceptable levels by heating to high temperatures or by prolonged boiling.  Phytate can be reduced enzymatically or by soaking or fermentation.  Phytoestrogens can be reduced by fermentation. 4.1.2.4 Field beans or faba beans (Viciafaba L.) should not be used in the formulation of Complementary Food for Older Infants and Young Children because of the danger of favism. Heat treatment does not completely inactivate the toxic components (vicine and co-vicine). 4.1.3 Oil Seed Flours and Oil Seed Protein Products 4.1.3.1 Flours, protein concentrates and protein isolates of oil seeds are acceptable if manufactured to appropriate specifications4,5,6,7 which assure sufficient reduction of anti-nutritional factors and undesirable toxic substances such as trypsin and chymotrypsin inhibitors and gossypol. The decision to add oil seeds flour to a formulated complementary food should take into account local conditions and requirements. Such oil seeds may include Soya beans: dehulled flour, (full fat and defatted) protein concentrate, protein isolate Groundnuts: paste, protein isolate Sesame seed: whole ground and defatted flour Cottonseed: defatted flour Sunflower seed: defatted flour, full fat Low erucic acid rapeseed: full fat flour. 4.1.3.2 Defatted oil seed flours and protein isolates, if produced and appropriately processed for human consumption, can be good sources of protein (50-95%). 4.1.4 Animal Source Foods Animal source foods such as meat, fish, poultry, eggs, milk and milk products are nutrient dense and good sources of high quality proteins and micronutrients and incorporation of these foods or their derived protein concentrates in Formulated Complementary Foods as technologically feasible is encouraged. 4.1.5 Fats and Oils 4.1.5.1 Fats and oils can be incorporated in adequate quantities as technologically feasible for the purpose of increasing the energy density of the product. Care must be taken to avoid oxidized fat which will adversely affect nutrition, flavour and shelf life. Such care is important for fat-containing ingredients (e.g., oil seed flours and oil seed protein products, fish meals, and fish protein concentrates) as well as fats and oils. 4.1.5.2 Partially hydrogenated fats (and oils) should not be used in Formulated Complementary Foods. 4.1.6 Fruits and Vegetables Fruits and vegetables may be good sources of micronutrients and can be added to Formulated Complementary Foods, when technologically feasible. 4 The following Guidelines were elaborated by the FAO/WHO/UNICEF Protein and Energy Advisory Group: PAG Guidelines No 2: Preparation of Food Quality Ground Flour PAG Guidelines No 4: Preparation of Edible Cotton Seed Protein Concentrates PAG Guidelines No 5: Guideline for Heat Processed Soy Grits and Flours 5 Standard for Vegetable Protein Products (CODEX STAN 174-1989) 6 Standard for Soy Protein Products (CODEX STAN 175-1989) 7 Standard for wheat protein products including wheat gluten (CODEX STAN 163-1987) -- 3 of 10 -- CAC/GL 8-1991 4 4.2 Other Ingredients Other ingredients, including those listed below, may be used to improve the nutritional quality and/or acceptability of the Formulated Complementary Foods provided that they are readily available and have been proven to be suitable and safe for their intended purpose. 4.2.1 Digestible carbohydrates Energy density of Formulated Complementary Foods can be increased by the addition of appropriate digestible carbohydrates. 4.2.2 Food additives and flavourings Food additives and flavourings listed in the Standard for Processed Cereal-Based Foods for Infants and Young Children (CODEX STAN 74-1981) and the Standard for Canned Baby Foods (CODEX STAN 73- 1981) may be used in Formulated Complementary Foods to the maximum limits given in those Standards. Only the food additives referred to in those Standards may be present in the foods covered by these Guidelines, as a result of carry-over from a raw material or other ingredients (including food additives) used to produce the food, subject to the following conditions: a) The amount of the food additive in the raw materials or other ingredients (including food additives) does not exceed the maximum level specified; and b) The food into which the food additive is carried over does not contain the food additive in greater quantity than would be introduced by the use of the raw material or ingredients under good manufacturing practice, consistent with the provisions on carry-over in the Preamble of the General Standard for Food Additives (CODEX STAN 192-1995). 5. TECHNOLOGIES FOR AND EFFECTS OF PROCESSING 5.1 Preliminary Treatment of Raw Materials Cereals, legumes, pulses and oilseeds should first be treated to obtain wholesome and clean raw materials of good quality. Such treatments include, but are not limited to: 5.1.1 Cleaning or washing: to eliminate dirt, damaged grains, foreign grains and noxious seeds, insects and insect excreta and any adhering material. 5.1.2 Dehulling: when necessary, pulses, legumes, oilseeds and certain cereals such as oats, barley, sorghum, millet and teff should be dehulled as completely as is feasible to reduce the fibre content to acceptable levels and to decrease, and if possible, to eliminate phytates, tannins and other phenolic materials, trypsin and chymotrypsin inhibitors which can lower the protein digestibility and amino acid bioavailability and mineral absorption. 5.1.3 Degermination: where necessary and appropriate, degermination of wheat, corn, soy and other crops should be considered in order to reduce the phytate content. 5.2 Milling 5.2.1 Milling or grinding of suitable raw materials should be carried out in such a way as to minimize the loss of nutritional value and to avoid undesirable changes in the technological properties of the ingredients. 5.2.2 Dry raw materials may be milled together, if technologically feasible, or mixed after milling or grinding. 5.2.3 Formulations containing milled cereals, legumes, pulses and/or oilseeds that have not been otherwise processed require adequate boiling to gelatinize the starch portions and/or eliminate anti-nutritional factors present in legumes and pulses. Boiling improves the digestibility and absorption of nutrients. 5.2.4 The bulkiness of foods from food formulations containing dry ingredients obtained by milling of the raw materials can be reduced by adding, during the formulation, adequate amounts of enzymes such as alpha- amylase which, during the slow heating to boiling, predigest partially the starch and reduce the amount of water needed for the preparation of the food. 5.3 Toasting 5.3.1 Toasting (dry heating) enhances the flavour and the taste of the food through dextrinization of starch. It also improves digestibility and contributes to reducing the bulkiness of the formulated food. Moreover, it reduces microorganisms and enzyme activity and destroys insects, thus improving keeping qualities. -- 4 of 10 -- CAC/GL 8-1991 5 5.3.2 Protein damage due to the Maillard reaction may occur in the presence of reducing carbohydrates. The toasting process should therefore be carefully controlled. 5.3.3 Pulses as well as oilseeds such as soya beans, groundnuts and sesame seeds can be toasted as whole grains directly or after soaking. 5.3.4 Toasted raw materials can be milled or ground for use as ingredients. 5.4 Sprouting, Malting and Fermentation 5.4.1 Cereals and pulses can be induced to germinate by soaking or humidifying. It is necessary, however, to ensure that growth of mycotoxin producing microorganisms does not occur. The action of natural amylases contained in the grains results in the predigestion of the starchy portion of the grain (dextrinization) thus reducing the bulk of the food when prepared for feeding and, ultimately, increasing the nutrient density of the food. Sprouting, malting and fermentation can induce hydrolysis of phytates and decrease its inhibitory effect on mineral absorption, and may improve B vitamin content. 5.4.2 During the germination process, the seed coat of the grain splits and can be removed by washing. The malted raw material is milled or ground after drying. 5.5 Other Processing Technologies 5.5.1 Extrusion Cooking 5.5.1.1 The mix of milled or ground basic ingredients (cereals, pulses, oilseed flours) may be further processed by extrusion cooking. Extrusion cooking may decrease available L-lysine, sulphur-containing amino acids, L- arginine, L-tryptophan and vitamins. The process should therefore be carefully controlled. The extruded product, after drying if necessary, is milled or ground to the desired particle size. 5.5.1.2 The effects of this technology are:  gelatinization of the starchy portion of the mixture with minimal quantities of water;  inactivation of lectins and reduction of trypsin inhibitor activity;  a reduction in the quantities of water needed for preparation of the food;  flavour development. 5.5.2 Enzymatic Predigestion 5.5.2.1 With this process the milled or ground basic ingredients (cereals, pulses, and oilseed flours) can be processed in the presence of water and appropriate enzymes under continuous stirring until the mixture acquires the desired fluidity. In the case of the use of amylase, starch molecules are split into dextrins and reducing sugars. After raising the temperature to inactivate the enzyme, the slurry is dried and comminuted to flour or to small flakes to allow for greater nutrient density. 5.5.2.2 The predigested product may have improved organoleptic characteristics, higher digestibility, good solubility, requires less water for the preparation of the food, and hence higher nutrient density. 6. NUTRITIONAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY FACTORS 6.1 General Aspects 6.1.1 The selection of raw materials and ingredients for the formulation of Formulated Complementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children should be made having regard to the provisions in Sections 4 and 5 and taking into account the following aspects:  nutrient content of the local diet;  dietary habits and infant feeding practices;  other socio-economic aspects as determined by the national authorities dealing with nutrition;  availability and quality of raw materials and ingredients. 6.1.2 All processing should be carried out in a manner that maintains protein quality and minimizes loss of micronutrients and maintain