PRINCIPLES AND GUIDANCE ON THE SELECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE COMMODITIES FOR THE EXTRAPOLATION OF MAXIMUM RESIDUE LIMITS FOR PESTICIDES TO COMMODITY GROUPS CXG 84-2012 Adopted in 2012. Amended in 2017, 2018, 2021, and 2023 -- 1 of 39 -- CXG 84-2012 2 Amendments CAC40 (2017) adopted Table 2, which provides examples of representative commodities for Class A (Primary commodities of plant origin), Type 02 (Vegetables), and Table 3, which offers examples of representative commodities for Class A, Type 03 (Grasses). This adoption followed the revision of the Classification of foods and animal feeds (CXA 4-1989) to include the updated types for vegetables and grasses. CAC41 (2018) adopted Table 4, which provides examples of representative commodities for Class A, Type 04 (Nuts, seeds, and saps), and Table 5, which offers examples of representative commodities for Class A, Type 05 (Herbs and spices). This adoption followed the revision of the Classification to include the updated types for nuts, seeds, and saps, as well as for herbs and spices. CAC44 (2021) adopted Table 7, which provides examples of representative commodities for Class C (Primary animal feed commodities), Type 11 (Primary feed commodities of plant origin), and Table 8, which provides examples of representative commodities for Class D (Processed foods of plant origin), for all types. This adoption followed the revision of the Classification to include the updated Class C and Class D for all types within these classes. CAC46 (2023) adopted Table 6, which provides examples of representative commodities for Class B (Primary food commodities of animal origin), for all types, and Table 9, which offers examples of representative commodities for Class E (Processed foods of animal origin), for all types. This adoption followed the revision of the Classification to include the updated Class B and Class E for all types within these classes. CAC46 (2023) also adopted a technical amendment to Table 2, Group 12 (Fruiting vegetables, other than cucurbits), Subgroup 12C (eggplant and eggplant-like commodities) to reflect the extrapolation applied by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR) for the establishment of maximum residue limits (MRLs) for eggplants from chili peppers and/or sweet peppers. Note The Principles and guidance should be consulted together with the Classification of foods and animal feeds (CXA 4-1989) to support a comprehensive understanding of crop group MRLs within the Codex database for pesticides in food and feed established through extrapolation. -- 2 of 39 -- CXG 84-2012 3 INTRODUCTION Residue extrapolation is the process by which the residue levels on representative commodities are utilised to estimate residue levels on related commodities in the same commodity group or subgroup for which trials have not been conducted. Representative commodities are chosen based on their commercial importance and the similarity of their morphology and residue characteristics to other related commodities in the group or subgroup. Ideally representative commodities are the most economically important commodities in production and/or consumption in a group or subgroup, have a greater dietary burden, and have residue characteristics similar to other members of the group or subgroup. Residue extrapolation is a common consideration utilised by regulators internationally for ensuring that data requirements are only at a level that is scientifically justified in conducting risk assessment and to ensure the regulatory process does not become unnecessarily burdensome, especially for minor crops. The objective of this document is to (1) propose criteria for the selection of representative commodities; (2) propose example representative commodities, and (3) provide a detailed justification for the selection of the representative commodities. GENERAL PRINCIPLES Representative commodities within each Classificationi commodity group and subgroup will be selected and proposed, based on consideration of all available information. The following principles will be used for the selection of representative commodities: − A representative commodity is most likely to contain the highest residues. − A representative commodity is likely to be major in terms of production and/or consumption. − A representative commodity is most likely similar in morphology, growth habit, pest problems, and edible portion to the related commodities within a group or subgroup. The application of the three principles in the selection of representative commodities is based on the assumption that all of the commodities covered by the commodity group maximum residue limit (MRL) are produced following a similarii use pattern or good agricultural practice (GAP). To facilitate the global use of the commodity groups for MRLs, alternative representative commodities may be selected, giving flexibility for use of residue research conducted in different countries or regions that may vary due to regional differences in dietary consumption and/or areas of production for certain commodities. Note: The tables in this document are provided to (1) separate the selection of representative commodities from the Classification itself; (2) propose examples of representative commodities in parallel with the respective Codex commodity grouping Classification revisions; (3) provide flexibility on the selection of representative crops and (4) provide guidance not only to the Committee on Pesticide Residues (CCPR) and Codex members, but also to the Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), product manufacturers and other data generators. Detailed background information regarding production, consumption, MRLs, characteristics, and justification for selection of the representative commodities according to the indicated principles was provided in working documents considered by the Committee when developing the representative commodities for each commodity group. GUIDANCE AND PROCEDURES As proposals for the revision of the Classification are made and revised commodity groupings are developed and provided to CCPR for their review, proposals on representative commodities will also be provided in parallel with the respective commodity grouping revisions and will advance through the Step Procedure for adoption by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC). i Classification of Foods and Animal Feeds (CXA 4-1989) ii Submission and Evaluation of Pesticide Residues Data for the Estimation of Maximum Residue Levels in Food and Feed (Section 6.7, Point a), FAO Plant Production and Protection Paper 197, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, 2009 (Second Edition) -- 3 of 39 -- CXG 84-2012 4 As comments are addressed on the revisions of the Classification and the proposed representative commodities, and these are agreed by CCPR and adopted by CAC, two separate documents will be created and maintained: (1) the Classification (without mention of representative commodities) and (2) principles and guidance on the selection of representative commodities. The JMPR may be advised to use the representative commodities adopted by CAC. However, JMPR may use other representative commodities (including those which may be specifically requested by member nations) on a case-by-case basis. The JMPR will be requested to provide to CCPR justification for the use of any alternative representative commodities, based on all available data. Alternative representative commodities To facilitate the global use of the commodity groups for MRLs, alternative representative commodities may be selected, giving flexibility for the use of residue research conducted in different countries or regions that may vary due to regional differences in dietary consumption and/or areas of production for certain commodities. The tables in this document propose examples of representative commodities for commodity groups. Depending on the country or regional differences, alternative representative commodities may be proposed by a country. For example, leeks may be proposed as an alternative representative commodity for green onions in the green onion subgroup of bulb vegetables. Precedence in the selection of representative commodities In situations where a representative commodity does not meet all three of the above principles, a representative commodity should at least meet the first two principles (likely to contain the highest residues and also major in terms of production and/or consumption). Selection of Representative Commodities When representative commodities are utilised to extrapolate residue levels to other members of a commodity group, it is on the assumption that residues in other members of the commodity group will not be significantly different to residues found in the representative commodity. That is, the representative commodities are good indicators of the upper range of residues likely to be encountered for the group or subgroup, based on the same or comparable GAP and other available information. An MRL for the group may be estimated from the highest residue level for any of the individual representative commodities or from the larger combined data set. The ALARAiii Principle should be considered in terms of whether the larger residue data set should be combined and the potential impact of derived values used in the dietary risk assessment. Wider extrapolations A representative commodity should meet at least the first two principles described above, i.e. likely to contain the highest residues and also major in terms of production and/or consumption. However, it may not always fit well with the growth habits or pest problems of morphology within one group or subgroup. In such situations, extrapolations beyond the members of a commodity group may be appropriate. These can be considered on a case-by-case basis when commodities (with similar GAPs) have similar size, shape, and surface area. Examples of these possible wider extrapolations include (1) translation of certain stone or pome fruit MRLs to a tropical fruit; (2) where residues are all <LOQ (limit of quantification) for pre-emergent herbicide uses, and (3) seed treatments for non-systemic pesticides. iii ALARA (as low as reasonable achievable) -- 4 of 39 -- CXG 84-2012 5 TABLE 1: EXAMPLES OF THE SELECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE COMMODITIES CLASS A - PRIMARY FOOD COMMODITIES OF PLANT ORIGIN TYPE 01 - FRUITS Codex group / subgroup Examples of representative commodities* Extrapolation to the following commodities Group 001 Citrus fruits Lemon or lime; Mandarin; orange and pummelo or grapefruit Citrus Fruit (FC 0001): Australian blood lime; Australian desert lime; Australian round lime; Brown River finger-lime; Calamondin; Citron; Clementine; Grapefruit; Kaffir Lime; Kumquats; Lemon; Lime; Lime, Sweet; Limequats; Mandarin; Mount White-lime; New guinea wild lime; Orange Sour; Orange, Sweet; Pummelo; Russell River- lime; Tahiti Lime; Trifoliate orange; Unshu orange; Yuzu. Subgroup 001A, Lemons and Limes Lemon or Lime Lemons and Limes (FC 0002): Australina blood lime; Australian desert lime; Australian round lime; Brown River finger-lime; Citron; Kaffir Lime; Kumquats; Lemon; Lime; Lime, Sweet; Limequats; Mount White-lime; New guinea wild lime; Russell River-lime; Tahiti Lime; Yuzu. Subgroup 001B, Mandarin Mandarin Mandarins (FC 003): Calamondin; Clementine; Mandarin; Unshu orange. Subgroup 001C, Oranges, Sweet, Sour Orange Oranges, Sweet, Sour (FC 004): Orange Sour; Orange, Sweet; Trifoliate orange. Subgroup 001D, Pummelos Pummelo or Grapefruit Pummelos and Grapefruit (FC 005): Grapefruit; Pummelo. Group 002 Pome Fruits Apple or Pear Pome Fruit (FP 0009): Apple; Azarole; Chinese quince; Crab-apple; Loquat; Mayhaw; Medlar; Nashi pear; Pear; Persimmon, Japanese; Quince; Tejocote; Wild pear. Group 003 Stone Fruits Cherry, Sweet or Cherry, Sour; Plum or Prune Plum or Peach or Apricot Stone fruits (FS 0012): Apricot; Bullace; Cherry, black; Cherry, Nanking; Cherry plum; Cherry Sour; Cherry, Sweet; Choke cherry; Japanese apricot; Jujube, Chinese; Klamath plum; Nectarine; Peach; Plum; Plum, beach; Plum, Chickasaw; Plumcot; Sloe. Subgroup 003A, Cherries Cherry, Sweet or Cherry, Sour Cherries (FS 0013): Cherry, black; Cherry, Nanking; Cherry Sour; Cherry, Sweet; Choke cherry Subgroup 003B, Plums Plum or Prune Plum Plums (FS 0014): Bullace; Cherry plum; Jujube, Chinese; Klamath plum; Plum, Plum, beach; Plum, Chickasaw; Plumcot; Sloe. Subgroup 003C, Peaches Peach or Apricot Peaches (FS 2001): Apricot; Japanese apricot; Nectarine; Peach. -- 5 of 39 -- CXG 84-2012 6 Codex group / subgroup Examples of representative commodities* Extrapolation to the following commodities Group 004 Berries and other small fruits Blackberry or Raspberry; Blueberry or Currants, black, red or white; Elderberry; Grape and Strawberry Berries and other small fruits (FB 0018): Agritos; Amur river grape; Arguta kiwifruit; Aronia berries; Bayberries; Bearberry; Bilberry; Bilberry, Bog; Bilberry, Red; Blackberries; Blueberries; Buffaloberry; Buffalo currant; Che; Chilean guava; Cloudberry; Cranberry; Currants, Black, Red, White; Dewberries; Elderberries; European barberry; Guelder rose; Gooseberry; Grapes; Huckleberries; Jostaberries; Juneberries; Mulberries; Muntries; Native currant; Partridge berry; Phalsa; Raspberries, Red, Black; Riberries; Rose hips; Salal; Schisandraberry; Sea buckthorn; Service berries; Silverberry, Russian; Strawberry; Strawberries, Wild; Table grapes; Vaccinium berries; Wine grapes. Subgroup 004A, Cane berries Blackberry or Raspberry Cane berries (FB 2005): Blackberries; Dewberries; Raspberries, Red, Black. Subgroup 004B, Bush berries Blueberry or Currants, black, red, or white Bush berries (FB 2006): Vaccinium berries; Blueberries; Agritos; Aronia berries; Bearberry; Bilberry; Bilberry, Bog; Bilberry, Red; Buffalo currant; Chilean guava; Currants, Black, Red, White; Gooseberry; European barberry; Huckleberries; Jostaberries; Juneberries; Native currant; Riberries; Rose hips; Salal; Sea buckthorn. Subgroup 004C, Large shrub/tree berries Elderberry Large shrub/tree berries (FB 2007): Bayberries; Buffaloberry; Che; Elderberries; Guelder rose; Mulberries; Phalsa; Service berries; Silverberry, Russian. Subgroup 004D, Small fruit vine climbing Grapes Small fruit vine climbing (FB 2008): Arguta kiwifruit; Amur river grape; Grapes; Schisandraberry; Table grapes; Wine grapes. Subgroup 004E, Low growing berries Strawberry Low growing berries (FB 2009): Cranberry; Cloudberry; Muntries; Partridge berry; Strawberry; Strawberries, Wild. -- 6 of 39 -- CXG 84-2012 7 Codex group / subgroup Examples of representative commodities* Extrapolation to the following commodities Group 005 Assorted tropical and sub-tropical fruits – edible peel Olive; Fig or Guava and Date Assorted tropical and sub-tropical fruits – edible peel (FT 0026): Açaí; African plum; Almondette; Ambarella; Apak palm; Apple berry; Arazá; Arbutus b