-1- GUIDELINE FOR THE CONDUCT OF FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF FOODS DERIVED FROM RECOMBINANT-DNA ANIMALS CAC/GL 68-2008 SECTION 1 - SCOPE 1. This Guideline supports the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology. It addresses safety and nutritional aspects of foods consisting of, or derived from, animals that have a history of safe use as sources of food, and that have been modified by modern biotechnology to exhibit new or altered expression of traits1. 2. The development, raising and use of animals for human purposes, and in particular, for use for food, raise a variety of issues beyond food safety. Without prejudice to their legitimacy or importance, or to whether or how the use of recombinant-DNA methods in developing animals for food use might affect those issues, this Guideline addresses only food safety and nutritional issues. It therefore does not address: • animal welfare; • ethical, moral and socio-economical aspects; • environmental risks related to the environmental release of recombinant-DNA animals used in food production; • the safety of recombinant-DNA animals used as feed, or the safety of animals fed with feed derived from recombinant-DNA animals, plants and microorganisms. 3. The Codex principles of risk analysis, particularly those for risk assessment, are primarily intended to apply to discrete chemical entities such as food additives and pesticide residues, or a specific chemical or microbial contaminant that have identifiable hazards and risks; they are not intended to apply to whole foods as such. Indeed, few foods, whatever their origin, have been assessed scientifically in a manner that would fully characterize all risk associated with the food. Further, many foods contain substances that would likely be found harmful if subjected to conventional approaches to safety testing. Thus, a more focused approach is required where the safety of a whole food is being considered. 4. This approach is based on the principle that the safety of foods derived from new animal lines, including recombinant-DNA animals, is assessed relative to the conventional counterpart having a history of safe use, taking into account both intended and unintended effects. Rather than trying to identify every hazard associated with a particular food, the intention is to identify new or altered hazards relative to the conventional counterpart. 5. This safety assessment approach falls within the risk assessment framework as discussed in Section 3 of the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology. If a new or altered hazard, nutritional or other food safety concern is identified by the safety assessment, the risk associated with it would first be assessed to determine its relevance to human health. Following the safety assessment and, if necessary, further risk assessment, the food would be subjected to risk management considerations in accordance with the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology before it is considered for commercial distribution. 6. Risk management measures such as post-market monitoring of consumer health effects may assist the risk assessment process. These are discussed in paragraph 20 of the Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology. 7. The Guideline describes the recommended approach for the food safety assessment of foods derived from recombinant-DNA animals where a conventional counterpart exists, and identifies the data and information that are generally applicable to making such assessments.2 In assessing the safety of food from recombinant-DNA animals, the approach should take into account all of the following: A) the nature of the recombinant-DNA construct and its expression product(s), if any; B) the health status of the recombinant-DNA animal; and C) the composition of foods produced from recombinant-DNA animals, including key nutrients. 1 This Guideline was developed primarily for animals bearing heritable recombinant-DNA constructs. 2 The approach to the safety assessment of foods derived from recombinant-DNA animals was first discussed at the 1991 Joint FAO/WHO Consultation on Strategies for Assessing the Safety of Foods Produced by Biotechnology. Further elaboration of the recommended approach was undertaken at the 2003 Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Genetically Modified Animals, Including Fish. -- 1 of 13 -- -2- While this Guideline is designed for foods derived from recombinant-DNA animals, the approach described could, in general, be applied to foods derived from animals that have been altered by other techniques3. 8. A diverse range of animals are used as food or for food production (e.g. mammals, birds, finfish and shellfish) and may be modified using in vitro nucleic acid techniques. Because of the combined impacts of their genetic diversity, husbandry, and conditions under which they are raised or harvested, assessment of food safety must be considered on a case-by-case basis, with due regard to the framework presented in this Guideline. SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS 9. The definitions below apply to this Guideline: “Recombinant-DNA Animal” — an animal in which the genetic material has been changed through in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles. “Conventional Counterpart” — an animal breed with a known history of safe use as food from which the recombinant-DNA animal line was derived, as well as the breeding partners used in generating the animals ultimately used as food, and/or food derived from such animals 4. SECTION 3 - INTRODUCTION TO FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT 10. Traditionally, food products derived from animals developed through conventional breeding or obtained from wild species have not been systematically subjected to extensive chemical, toxicological, or nutritional evaluation prior to marketing. Thus, although new breeds of animals are often evaluated by breeders for phenotypic characteristics they are not subjected to the rigorous and extensive food safety testing procedures, including validated toxicity studies in test animals, that are typical of chemicals such as food additives or contaminants that may be present in food. Instead, food derived from an animal of known and acceptable health status has generally been considered suitable for human consumption. 11. The use of animal models for assessing toxicological endpoints is a major element in the risk assessment of many compounds, such as pesticides. In most cases, however, the substance to be tested is well characterized, of known purity, of no particular nutritional value, and human exposure to it is generally low. It is therefore relatively straightforward to feed such compounds to test animals at a range of doses some several orders of magnitude greater than the expected human exposure levels, in order to identify any potential adverse health effects of importance to humans. In this way, it is possible in most cases, to estimate levels of exposure at which adverse effects are not observed and to set safe intake levels by the application of appropriate safety factors. 12. Studies using test animals cannot readily be applied to testing the risks associated with whole foods, which are complex mixtures of compounds, and often characterized by a wide variation in composition and nutritional value. Due to their bulk and effect on satiety, they can usually only be fed to test animals at low multiples of the amounts that might be present in the human diet. In addition, a key factor to consider in conducting animal studies on foods is the nutritional value and balance of the diets used, in order to avoid the induction of adverse effects that are not related directly to the material itself. Detecting any potential adverse effects and relating these conclusively to an individual characteristic of the food can therefore be extremely difficult. If the characterization of the food indicates that the available data are insufficient for a thorough safety assessment, properly designed studies using test animals could be requested on the whole food. Another consideration in deciding the need for studies with test animals is whether it is appropriate to subject test animals to such a study if it is unlikely to give rise to meaningful information. 13. Due to the difficulties of applying traditional toxicological testing and risk assessment procedures to whole foods, and based on the experience of assessing the safety of whole foods, a more focused approach is required for the safety assessment of food derived from animals, including recombinant-DNA animals. This has been addressed by the development of a multidisciplinary approach for assessing safety, which takes into account both intended and unintended changes that may occur in the animal or in the food products derived from it, using the concept of substantial equivalence. 3 The food safety assessment of foods derived from animals bearing non-heritable constructs may require additional specific consideration, e.g. regarding hazards identified in the 2007 Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant-DNA Animals. 4 It is recognized that for the foreseeable future, foods derived from modern biotechnology will not be used as conventional counterparts. -- 2 of 13 -- -3- 14. The concept of substantial equivalence is a key step in the safety assessment process. However, it is not a safety assessment in itself; rather it represents the starting point, which is used to structure the safety assessment of a new food relative to its conventional counterpart. This concept is used to identify similarities and differences between the new food and its conventional counterpart5. It aids in the identification of potential food safety and nutritional issues and is considered the most appropriate strategy to date for safety assessment of foods derived from recombinant-DNA animals. The safety assessment carried out in this way does not imply absolute safety of the new product; rather, it focuses on assessing the safety of any identified differences so that the safety of the new product can be considered relative to its conventional counterpart. UNINTENDED EFFECTS 15. In achieving the objective of conferring a specific trait (intended effect) to an animal by the insertion of defined DNA sequences, additional traits could, in some cases, be acquired or existing traits could be lost or modified (unintended effects). The potential occurrence of unintended effects is not restricted to the use of in vitro nucleic acid techniques. Rather, it is an inherent and general phenomenon that can also occur in conventional breeding as well in association with the use of assisted reproductive technologies currently in use. Unintended effects may be deleterious, beneficial, or neutral with respect to the health of the animal or the safety of the foods derived from the animal. Unintended effects in recombinant-DNA animal may also arise through the insertion of DNA sequences and/or they may arise through subsequent conventional breeding of the recombinant-DNA animal. Safety assessment should include data and information to reduce the possibility that a food derived from a recombinant-DNA animal would have an unexpected, adverse effect on human health. 16. Unintended effects can result from the random insertion of DNA sequences into the animal genome, which may cause disruption or silencing of existing genes, activation of silent genes, or modifications in the expression of existing genes. Unintended effects may also result in the formation of new or changed patterns of metabolites. 17. Unintended effects due to in vitro nucleic acid techniques may be subdivided into two groups: those that are “predictable” and those that are “unexpected”. Many unintended effects are largely predictable based on knowledge of the inserted trait and its metabolic connections or of the site of insertion. As knowledge of animal genomes grows, and familiarity with in vitro nucleic acid techniques increases, it may become easier to predict unintended effects of a particular modification. For example, homologous recombination, where appropriate, allows precise gene placement and so may reduce the occurrence of unintended effects associated with random integration. Molecular biological and biochemical techniques can also be used to analyse changes that occur at the level of transcription and translation that could lead to unintended effects. These should all be considered on a case-by-case basis. 18. The safety assessment of food derived from recombinant-DNA animals involves methods to identify and detect such unintended effects and procedures to evaluate their biological relevance and potential impact on food safety. A variety of data and information are necessary to assess unintended effects, because no individual test can detect all possible unintended effects or identify, with certainty, those relevant to human health. These data and information, when considered in total, provide assurance that the food is unlikely to have an adverse effect on human health. The assessment of unintended effects takes into account the phenotypic characteristics of the animal that are typically monitored by breeders during animal production stock development and improvement. These assessments provide a first screen for recombinant-DNA animals exhibiting unintended traits. Recombinant-DNA animals that pass this screen are subjected to safety assessment as described in Sections 4 and 5. F RAMEWORK OF F OOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT 19. The safety assessment follows a stepwise process of addressing relevant factors that include: A) General description of the recombinant-DNA animal; B) Description of the recipient animal prior to the modification6 and its use as food or for food production; C) Description of the donor organism or other source(s) of the introduced recombinant-DNA; D) Description of the genetic modification(s) including the construct(s) used to introduce the recombinant-DNA; E) Description of the methods used to produce the initial recombinant-DNA animal 7 and the processes to produce the recombinant-DNA animal ultimately used as food or for food production; 5 The concept of substantial equivalence as described in the report of the 2000 joint FAO/WHO expert consultation (Document WHO/SDE/PHE/FOS/00.6, WHO, Geneva, 2000). The concept of substantial equivalence was further considered in the context of comparative safety assessment at the 2003 Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Genetically Modified Animals, Including Fish. 6 Not to be confused with a surrogate dam. 7 First animal produced as a result of introducing the recombinant-DNA construct. Sometimes referred to as the founder animal 