1 Nutrition and Health Claims (CAC/GL 23-1997) Adopted in 1997. Revised in 2004. Amended in 2001, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013. Annex adopted 2009. GUIDELINES FOR USE OF NUTRITION AND HEALTH CLAIMS CAC/GL 23-1997 Nutrition claims should be consistent with national nutrition policy and support that policy. Only nutrition claims that support national nutrition policy should be allowed. Health claims should be consistent with national health policy, including nutrition policy, and support such policies where applicable. Health claims should be supported by a sound and sufficient body of scientific evidence to substantiate the claim, provide truthful and non-misleading information to aid consumers in choosing healthful diets and be supported by specific consumer education. The impact of health claims on consumers’ eating behaviours and dietary patterns should be monitored, in general, by competent authorities. Claims of the type described in section 3.4 of the Codex General Guidelines on Claims are prohibited. 1. SCOPE 1.1 These guidelines relate to the use of nutrition and health claims in food labelling and, where required by the authorities having jurisdiction, in advertising1. 1.2 These guidelines apply to all foods for which nutrition and health claims are made without prejudice to specific provisions under Codex standards or Guidelines relating to Foods for Special Dietary Uses and Foods for Special Medical Purposes. 1.3 These guidelines are intended to supplement the Codex General Guidelines on Claims and do not supersede any prohibitions contained therein. 1.4 Nutrition and health claims shall not be permitted for foods for infants and young children except where specifically provided for in relevant Codex standards or national legislation. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 Nutrition claim means any representation which states, suggests or implies that a food has particular nutritional properties including but not limited to the energy value and to the content of protein, fat and carbohydrates, as well as the content of vitamins and minerals. The following do not constitute nutrition claims: (a) the mention of substances in the list of ingredients; (b) the mention of nutrients as a mandatory part of nutrition labelling; (c) quantitative or qualitative declaration of certain nutrients or ingredients on the label if required by national legislation. 2.1.1 Nutrient content claim is a nutrition claim that describes the level of a nutrient contained in a food. (Examples: “source of calcium”; “high in fibre and low in fat”.) 2.1.2 Nutrient comparative claim is a claim that compares the nutrient levels and/or energy value of two or more foods. (Examples: “reduced”; “less than”; “fewer”; “increased”; “more than”.) 2.1.3 Non-addition claim means any claim that an ingredient has not been added to a food, either directly or indirectly. The ingredient is one whose presence or addition is permitted in the food and which consumers would normally expect to find in the food. 2. 2 Health claim means any representation that states, suggests, or implies that a relationship exists between a food or a constituent of that food and health. Health claims include the following: 1 Advertising means any commercial communication to the public, by any means other than labelling, in order to promote directly or indirectly, the sale or intake of a food through the use of nutrition and health claims in relation to the food and its ingredients. -- 1 of 8 -- 2 Nutrition and Health Claims (CAC/GL 23-1997) 2.2.1 Nutrient function claims – a nutrition claim that describes the physiological role of the nutrient in growth, development and normal functions of the body. Example: “Nutrient A (naming a physiological role of nutrient A in the body in the maintenance of health and promotion of normal growth and development). Food X is a source of/ high in nutrient A.” 2.2.2 Other function claims – These claims concern specific beneficial effects of the consumption of foods or their constituents, in the context of the total diet on normal functions or biological activities of the body. Such claims relate to a positive contribution to health or to the improvement of a function or to modifying or preserving health. Examples: “Substance A (naming the effect of substance A on improving or modifying a physiological function or biological activity associated with health). Food Y contains x grams of substance A.” 2.2.3 Reduction of disease risk claims – Claims relating the consumption of a food or food constituent, in the context of the total diet, to the reduced risk of developing a disease or health-related condition. Risk reduction means significantly altering a major risk factor(s) for a disease or health-related condition. Diseases have multiple risk factors and altering one of these risk factors may or may not have a beneficial effect. The presentation of risk reduction claims must ensure, for example, by use of appropriate language and reference to other risk factors, that consumers do not interpret them as prevention claims. Examples: “A healthful diet low in nutrient or substance A may reduce the risk of disease D. Food X is low in nutrient or substance A.” “A healthful diet rich in nutrient or substance A may reduce the risk of disease D. Food X is high in nutrient or substance A.” 3. NUTRITION LABELLING Any food for which a nutrition or health claim is made should be labelled with a nutrient declaration in accordance with Section 3 of the Codex Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling. 4. NUTRITION CLAIMS 4.1 The only nutrition claims permitted shall be those relating to energy, protein, carbohydrate, and fat and components thereof, fibre, sodium and vitamins and minerals for which Nutrient Reference Values (NRVs) have been laid down in the Codex Guidelines for Nutrition Labelling. 5. NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS 5.1 When a nutrient content claim that is listed in the Table to these Guidelines or a synonymous claim is made, the conditions specified in the Table for that claim should apply. 5.2 A claim to the effect that a food is free of salt can be made, provided the food meets the conditions for free of sodium listed in the Table to these Guidelines. 5.3 Where a food is by its nature low in or free of the nutrient that is the subject of the claim, the term describing the level of the nutrient should not immediately precede the name of the food but should be in the form “a low (naming the nutrient) food” or “a (naming the nutrient)-free food”. -- 2 of 8 -- 3 Nutrition and Health Claims (CAC/GL 23-1997) Table of conditions for nutrient content claims COMPONENT CLAIM CONDITIONS (not more than) Energy Low 40 kcal (170 kJ) per 100 g (solids) or 20 kcal (80 kJ) per 100 ml (liquids) Free 4 kcal per 100 ml (liquids) Fat Low 3 g per 100 g (solids) 1.5 g per 100 ml (liquids) Free 0.5 g per 100 g (solids) or 100 ml (liquids) Saturated Fat2 Low 1.5 g per 100 g (solids) 0.75 g per 100 ml (liquids) and 10% of energy from saturated fat Free 0.1 g per 100 g (solids) 0.1 g per 100 ml (liquids) Cholesterol2 Low 0.02 g per 100 g (solids) 0.01 g per 100 ml (liquids) Free 0.005 g per 100 g (solids) 0.005 g per 100 ml (liquids) and, for both claims, less than:1.5 g saturated fat per 100 g (solids) 0.75 g saturated fat per 100 ml (liquids) and 10% of energy from saturated fat Sugars Free 0.5 g per 100 g (solids) 0.5 g per 100 ml (liquids) Sodium Low 0.12 g per 100 g Very Low 0.04 g per 100 g Free 0.005 g per 100 g COMPONENT CLAIM CONDITIONS (not less than) Protein Source 10% of NRV per 100 g (solids) 5% of NRV per 100 ml (liquids) or 5% of NRV per 100 kcal (12% of NRV per 1 MJ) or 10% of NRV per serving High 2 times the values for “source” Vitamins and Minerals Source 15% of NRV per 100 g (solids) 7.5% of NRV per100 ml (liquids) or 5% of NRV per 100 kcal (12% of NRV per 1 MJ) or 15% of NRV per serving High 2 times the value for “source” Dietary Fibre Source 3 g per 100 g3 or 1.5 g per 100 kcal or 10 % of daily reference value per serving4 High 6 g per 100 g3 or 3 g per 100 kcal or 20 % of daily reference value per serving4 2 In the case of the claims for saturated fat and cholesterol, trans fatty acids should be taken into account where applicable. 3 Conditions for nutrient content claims for dietary fibre in liquid foods to be determined at national level. 4 Serving size and daily reference value to be determined at national level. -- 3 of 8 -- 4 Nutrition and Health Claims (CAC/GL 23-1997) 6. COMPARATIVE CLAIMS Comparative claims should be permitted subject to the following conditions and based on the food as sold, taking into account further preparation required for consumption according to the instructions for use on the label: 6.1 The foods being compared should be different versions of the same food or similar foods. The foods being compared should be clearly identified. 6.2 A statement of the amount of difference in the energy value or nutrient content should be given. The following information should appear in close proximity to the comparative claim: 6.2.1 The amount of difference related to the same quantity, expressed as a percentage, fraction, or an absolute amount. Full details of the comparison should be given. 6.2.2 The identity of the food(s) to which the food is being compared. The food(s) should be described in such a manner that it (they) can be readily identified by consumers. 6.3.1 For comparative claims about energy or macronutrients and sodium, the comparison should be based on a relative difference of at least 25% in the energy value or the nutrient content respectively between the compared foods and a minimum absolute difference in the energy value or nutrient content equivalent to the figure defined as “low” or as a “source” in the Table to these Guidelines. 6.3.2 For comparative claims about micronutrients other than sodium the comparison should be based on a difference of at least 10% of the NRV between the compared foods. 6.4 In addition to the conditions set out in Section 6.3, the content of trans fatty acids should not increase for foods carrying a comparison claim for decreased saturated fatty acids content. 6.5 The use of the word “light” or a synonymous claim should follow the criteria listed in Section 6.3 of these Guidelines and include an indication of the characteristics which make the food “light”. 7. NON-ADDITION CLAIMS 7.1 Non-Addition of Sugars Claims regarding the non-addition of sugars to a food may be made provided the following conditions are met. (a) No sugars of any type have been added to the food (Examples: sucrose, glucose, honey, molasses, corn syrup, etc.); (b) The food contains no ingredients that contain sugars as an ingredient (Examples: jams, jellies, sweetened chocolate, sweetened fruit pieces, etc.); (c) The food contains no ingredients containing sugars that substitute for added sugars (Examples: non- reconstituted concentrated fruit juice, dried fruit paste, etc.); and (d) The sugars content of the food itself has not been increased above the amount contributed by the ingredients by some other means (Example: the use of enzymes to hydrolyse starches to release sugars). 7.2 Non-Addition of Sodium Salts Claims regarding the non-addition of sodium salts to a food, including “no added salt”, may be made provided the following conditions are met5. (a) The food contains no added sodium salts, including but not limited to sodium chloride, sodium tripolyphosphate; (b) The food contains no ingredients that contain added sodium salts, including but not limited to Worcestershire sauce, pickles, pepperoni, soya sauce, salted fish, fish sauce; and (c) The food contains no ingredients that contain sodium salts that are used to substitute for added salt, including but not limited to seaweed. 5 Competent authorities may permit the addition for technological purposes of sodium salts other than sodium chloride as long as the final food would still comply with the conditions for “low in sodium” claims as described in the Table to these Guidelines. -- 4 of 8 -- 5 Nutrition and Health Claims (CAC/GL 23-1997) 7.3 Additional Conditions Additional conditions and/or disclaimer statements may be used with non-addition claims to assist consumer understanding of the claims within countries. Disclaimer statements should appear in close proximity to, on the same side and in the same prominence as the claim. These may be developed based on evidence of consumer use and understanding. 8. HEALTH CLAIMS 8.1 Health claims should be permitted provided that all of the following conditions are met: 8.1.1 Health claims must be based on current relevant scientific substantiation and the level of proof must be sufficient to substantiate the type of claimed effect and the relationship to health as recognized by generally accepted scientific review of the data and the scientific substantiation should be reviewed as new knowledge becomes available.6 The health claim must consist of two parts: 1) Information on the physiological role of the nutrient or on an accepted diet-health relationship; followed by 2) Information on the composition of the product relevant to the physiological role of the nutrient or the accepted diet-health relationship unless the relationship is based on a whole food or foods whereby the research does not link to specific constituents of the food. 8.1.2 Any health claim must be accepted by or be acceptable to the competent authorities of the country where the product is sold. 8.1.3 The claimed benefit should arise from the consumption of a reasonable quantity of the food or food constituent in the context of a healthy diet. 8.1.4 If the claimed benefit is attributed to a constituent in the food, for which a Nutrient Reference value is established, the food in question should be: (i) a source of or high in the constituent in the case where increased consumption is recommended; or, (ii) low in, reduced in, or free of the constituent in the case where reduced consumption is recommended. Where applicable, the conditions for nutrient content claims and comparative claims will be used to determine the levels for “high”, “low”, “reduced”, and “free”. 8.1.5 Only those essential nutrients for which a Nutrient Reference Value (NRV) has been established in the Codex Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling or those nutrients which are mentioned in officially recognized dietary guidelines of the national authority having jurisdiction, should be the subject of a nutrient function claim. 8.2 Health claims should have a clear regulatory framework for qualifying and/or disqualifying conditions for eligibility to use the specific claim, including the ability of competent national authorities to prohibit claims made for foods that contain nutrients or constituents in amounts that increase the risk of disease or an adverse health-related condition. The health claim should not be made if it encourages or condones excessive consumption of any food or disparages good dietary 