GUIDELINES ON INTEGRATED MONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE OF FOODBORNE ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE CXG 94-2021 Adopted in 2021 -- 1 of 14 -- CXG 94-2021 2 1. INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a global public health threat at the human, animal and environmental interface which necessitates a “One Health” approach. Monitoring and surveillance of foodborne AMR contributes to the food safety component of such an approach. For the purpose of these guidelines, monitoring refers to the collection and analysis of foodborne AMR, antimicrobial use (AMU)1 and related data and information. Surveillance is the systematic, continuous or repeated, measurement, collection, collation, validation, analysis and interpretation of data and trends from defined populations to inform risk analysis. These data may enable the measurement of the impact of risk management measures. Ideally the integrated monitoring and surveillance programme(s) includes the coordinated and systematic collection of data or samples at appropriate stages along the food chain and within the food production environment, and the testing, analysis and reporting of data. The integrated programme(s) includes the alignment and harmonization of sampling, testing, analysis and reporting methodologies and practices, as well as the integrated analysis of relevant epidemiological information from humans, animals, foods, plants/crops and the food production environment. National priorities, AMR food safety issues and scientific evidence, capabilities and available resources should guide the development of integrated monitoring and surveillance programme(s) which should undergo continuous improvement as resources permit. This does not imply that a country needs to implement both monitoring and surveillance in all stages or areas covered by the programme(s). The data generated by integrated monitoring and surveillance programme(s) provide valuable information for the risk analysis (risk assessment, risk management and risk communication) of foodborne AMR. These data may also be useful for trend analysis, epidemiological studies, food source attribution studies and research. While this document’s focus is on foodborne AMR, there is an implicit connection between the goal of addressing foodborne AMR with the goal of reducing foodborne illness, and thus a connection to the national food safety control system. These guidelines are intended to assist governments in the design and implementation of integrated monitoring and surveillance programme(s). They provide flexible options for implementation and expansion, considering resources, infrastructures, capacity, and priorities of countries. Each monitoring and surveillance programme should be designed to be relevant for national, and when appropriate, regional circumstances. While these guidelines are primarily aimed at action at the national level, countries may also consider creating or contributing to international, multinational or regional, monitoring and surveillance programme(s) to share laboratories, data management and other necessary resources. The design and implementation of monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should be assessed or re- assessed based on their relevance to foodborne AMR priorities at the national and, when appropriate, at the international level. Continuous improvement of the monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should take into account identified priorities and broader capacity issues. Continuous improvement may include: collecting more information or having new sources of data on AMU and AMR in humans, animals and/or plants/crops, availability of food consumption, agriculture and aquaculture production data, and improvement in cross-sector laboratory proficiency and quality assurance and reporting. Data generated from national monitoring and surveillance programme(s) on AMR in food should not be used to generate unjustified barriers to trade. These guidelines should be applied in conjunction with the Code of Practice to Minimize and Contain Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXC 61-2005) and the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011). Design and implementation aspects of these Guidelines should also take into account other relevant Codex texts including the Principles and Guidelines for National Food Control Systems (CXG 82-2013) and the General Guidelines on Sampling (CXG 50-2004). Where appropriate, the standards of other international standard setting organizations, including the standards of the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE standards) should be considered. These guidelines may also be used taking into consideration guidance already developed by other advisory bodies including the World Health Organization (WHO) Advisory Group on Integrated Surveillance of AMR (WHO-AGISAR) Integrated Surveillance of Antimicrobial Resistance in Foodborne Bacteria: Application of a One Health approach. 1 See description of AMU in Section 21 on components of integrated monitoring and surveillance programme(s) for AMU. -- 2 of 14 -- CXG 94-2021 3 2. SCOPE These guidelines cover the design and implementation of integrated monitoring and surveillance programme(s) for foodborne AMR and AMU along the food chain and the food production environment. Although these guidelines do not cover the design and implementation of monitoring and surveillance of AMR and AMU in humans, an integrated programme within the context of overall risk management of AMR (One Health approach) may be informed by data, trends, methodology and epidemiology regarding AMR and AMU in humans. The microorganisms covered by these guidelines are foodborne pathogens of public health relevance and indicator bacteria. Antimicrobials used as biocides including disinfectants, are excluded from the scope of these guidelines. 3. DEFINITIONS The definitions presented in the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77- 2011) and Code of Practice to Minimize and Contain Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXC 61-2005) are applicable to these guidelines. The following definitions are included to establish a common understanding of the terms used in these guidelines. Antimicrobial agent Any substance of natural, semi-synthetic or synthetic origin that at in vivo concentrations kills or inhibits the growth of microorganisms by interacting with a specific target.2 Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) The ability of a microorganism to multiply or persist in the presence of an increased level of an antimicrobial agent relative to the susceptible counterpart of the same species.3 Food chain Production to consumption continuum including, primary production (food- producing animals, plants/crops, feed), harvest/slaughter, packing, processing, storage, transport, and retail distribution to the point of consumption. Foodborne pathogen A pathogen present in food, which may cause human disease(s) or illness through consumption of food contaminated with the pathogen and/or the biological products produced by the pathogen.4 Food production environment The immediate vicinity of the food chain where there is relevant evidence that it could contribute to foodborne AMR. Hazard For the purpose of these guidelines, the term “hazard” refers to antimicrobial resistant microorganism(s) and/or resistance determinant(s).5 One Health approach A collaborative, multisectoral and trans-disciplinary approach working with the goal of achieving optimal health outcomes, recognizing the interconnection between humans, animals, plants and their shared environment. Plants/Crops A plant or crop that is cultivated or harvested as food or feed. 2 Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011), Section 3. 3 See note 2 above. 4 See note 2 above. 5 See note 2 above. -- 3 of 14 -- CXG 94-2021 4 4. PRINCIPLES Principle 1: A One Health approach should be applied whenever possible and applicable when establishing monitoring and surveillance programmes for foodborne AMR; contributing to the food safety component of such an approach. Principle 2: Monitoring and surveillance programme(s) are an important part of national strategy(ies) to minimize and contain the risk of foodborne AMR. Principle 3: Risk analysis should guide the design, implementation and evaluation of monitoring and surveillance programme(s). Principle 4: Monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should be designed to generate data on AMR and AMU, in relevant sectors to inform risk analysis. Principle 5: Monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should be tailored to national priorities and should be designed and implemented to allow continuous improvement as resources permit. Principle 6: Priority for implementation of monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should be given to the most relevant foodborne AMR and/or AMR food safety issues (which are the defined combinations of the food commodity, the AMR microorganism and determinants and the antimicrobial agent(s) to which resistance is expressed as described in the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance - CXG 77- 2011) from a public health perspective, taking into account national priorities. Principle 7: Monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should incorporate, to the extent practicable, the identification of new and emerging foodborne AMR or trends and should be designed to inform epidemiological investigation. Principle 8: Laboratories involved in monitoring and surveillance should have effective quality assurance/management systems in place. Principle 9: Monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should aim to harmonize laboratory methodology, data collection, analysis and reporting across sectors according to national priorities and resources as part of an integrated approach. Use of internationally recognized, standardized and validated methods and harmonized interpretative criteria, where available, contributes to the comparability of data, facilitates the multisectoral exchange and analysis of data and enhances an integrated approach to data management, analysis and interpretation. 5. RISK-BASED APPROACH For the purpose of these guidelines, a risk analysis approach – as described in the framework for foodborne AMR risk analysis (CXG 77-2011) – may inform the development, implementation and evaluation of monitoring and surveillance programme(s) with data and scientific knowledge regarding the likely occurrence of foodborne AMR hazards along the food chain and their potential to pose risks to human health. Information from monitoring and surveillance programme(s) and available data from other sources, are important for risk assessment and may inform decisions on the appropriateness of control measures to minimize and contain foodborne AMR. When information or data of foodborne AMR within a country is limited, monitoring and surveillance programme(s) may initially be designed according to the relevant data and/or scientific knowledge that is available on AMR hazards and their potential to result in public health risks. AMR food safety issues may be identified on the basis of information arising from a variety of sources, as described in the Guidelines for Risk Analysis of Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (CXG 77-2011). 6. REGULATORY FRAMEWORK, POLICY AND ROLES Integrated monitoring and surveillance programme(s) requires good governance by the competent authorities. As part of national action plans (NAPs) for AMR, the competent authorities responsible for the monitoring and surveillance activities along the food chain, including the food production environment, should ensure collaboration with human health, animal health, plant/crop health, environment and other relevant authorities. Activities related to monitoring and surveillance programme(s) should involve a wide range of relevant stakeholders who may contribute to the development, implementation and evaluation of integrated monitoring and surveillance. Sharing of knowledge and monitoring and surveillance results with international organizations on a voluntary basis, should be encouraged since it may improve the global understanding of foodborne AMR and inform risk analysis. It is important for competent authorities to have access to all available sources of relevant data in their country. -- 4 of 14 -- CXG 94-2021 5 7. PRELIMINARY ACTIVITIES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF AN INTEGRATED MONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME(S) FOR FOODBORNE AMR Preliminary activities for implementation are part of the framework for monitoring and surveillance programme(s). Undertaking pilot studies and testing provide valuable insights into the design of monitoring and surveillance programme(s). Countries should strive for continuous improvement of monitoring and surveillance activities and progress according to country-specific objectives, priorities, infrastructure, technical capability, resources and new scientific knowledge. 8. ESTABLISHING THE MONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE OBJECTIVES The establishment of monitoring and surveillance objectives should be done in a consultative manner by the competent authorities and stakeholders and should take into consideration existing food safety programmes, the AMR NAPs, relevant information on AMR and AMU in the country, as well as any existing activities to address AMR in the different sectors (human, animal, plant/crop, food and the environment). Competent authorities should identify the challenges they currently face during the implementation of these activities. The following aspects should be considered:  The primary reasons for the data collection (e.g. to evaluate trends over time and space; to provide data useful for risk assessments; to obtain baseline information).  The representativeness of the data collection (e.g. randomized samples; systematic sampling).  The setting of proposed timelines for sampling and reporting.  A description of how and to whom the information will be reported and communicated. 9. CONSIDERATIONS FOR PRIORITIZATION When establishing monitoring and surveillance priorities, the competent authorities should consider the epidemiology and public health implications of foodborne AMR, AMU patterns and available information on food production systems, food distribution, food consumption patterns and food exposure pathways. Monitoring and surveillance priorities for microorganisms and resistance determinants, antimicrobial agents and sample sources should be informed by national, regional and international public health data and scientific knowledge where it exists. Competent authorities should identify existing data sources and data gaps on foodborne AMR and AMU including data required for risk analysis or results of risk analysis. 10. INFRASTRUCTURE AND RESOURCES Once objectives and priorities have been established, competent authorities should determine the infrastructure, capacity and resources required to meet the ob