GUIDELINES ON THE APPLICATION OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF FOOD HYGIENE TO THE CONTROL OF FOODBORNE PARASITES CAC/GL 88-2016 Adopted 2016 -- 1 of 11 -- CAC/GL 88-2016 2 INTRODUCTION Foodborne parasites are a major public health burden worldwide1, particularly in areas with poor sanitary facilities and in populations that traditionally consume raw and undercooked food dishes. Infections may have prolonged, severe, and sometimes fatal outcomes, and result in considerable hardship in terms of food safety, security, quality of life, and negative impacts on livelihood. The joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/ World Health Organization (WHO) report on Multicriteria-Based Ranking for Risk Management of Foodborne Parasites2 lists 24 parasite species, genera or families that ranked highest in global public health concern. The top 8 highly ranked parasites are Taenia solium, Echinococcus granulosus, Echinococcus multilocularis, Toxoplasma gondii, Cryptosporidium spp., Entamoeba histolytica, Trichinella spp, and Opisthorchiidae. The ranking was based on 7 criteria of which 5 were public health related. The ranking was based on worldwide impacts and regionally other foodborne parasites may be more important. The ranking indicates that the foodborne parasites of greatest concern from a global public health perspective are not limited to a single parasite group or a food vehicle, but span a number of different parasites groups, and food vehicles. Knowledge of parasite life cycles, transmission routes and environmental requirements is needed to understand which control measures may be effective. Foodborne parasites are transmitted to humans by ingestion of fresh or processed foods that are contaminated as a consequence of the parasite’s life cycle (e.g. meat that contains Trichinella larvae or Toxoplasma tissue cysts) or that are contaminated with soil or water carrying infective stages of parasites (e.g. cysts, oocysts, eggs). In the first case, human infection can occur through the consumption of an infective stage in raw, undercooked or poorly processed meat and offal from domesticated animals, game, fish, crustaceans, cephalopods and molluscan shellfish. In the second case, human infection can occur from ingestion of infective stages in water and on foods such as fresh fruit and vegetables resulting from animal or human faecal contamination (e.g. oocysts of Cryptosporidium spp. in fresh vegetables). Control of foodborne parasites can be achieved through the prevention of infection of farmed food animals (e.g. livestock, poultry, fish) with infective stages, the prevention of contamination of fresh and processed foods with infective stages, and/or the inactivation of parasites in or on foods during processing. Control during primary production is important for many parasite/food combinations, while control measures during post- harvest are necessary for other parasite/food combinations. During a parasite hazard analysis, producers should consider how the product will be further processed, prepared and consumed in order to determine appropriate parasite control measures. Education and awareness-raising are important components of consumer protection from foodborne parasitic diseases and, in many cases, may be the only feasible option available. The first step of foodborne parasite risk management should be identifying any potential parasite hazard(s) applicable to the food being produced3. The details of the epidemiology (both human and animal disease) and the life cycle of each parasite are essential in the identification, prevention and control of the risks associated with that parasite. Epidemiological data collection in food and environmental parasite surveys can be effective in identifying hazards and collecting information to be used for risk management strategy decisions. Surveillance for parasitic diseases in humans is complicated by the often prolonged incubation periods, sub- clinical nature, unrecognized chronic sequelae and lack of easily available diagnostic procedures. The occurrence and distribution of parasitic species in the raw commodities used for food can be affected by climate changes, land use, and other environmental factors. The spread of foodborne parasitic diseases is also affected by human behaviour (for instance, environmental contamination by human faeces due to the lack of latrines and human-to-human contact that spread parasite eggs and cysts), demographics, and global trade. For example, globalization of food trade offers new opportunities for parasite dissemination into new areas. SECTION 1 - OBJECTIVES The primary purpose of these guidelines is to provide guidance on preventing, reducing, inactivating, or otherwise controlling foodborne parasite hazards that present a public health risk. The guidelines provide science-based advice to governments and the food industry with the aim of protecting the health of consumers against foodborne parasites and ensuring fair practices in food trade. The guidelines also provide information that will be of value to consumers and other interested parties. 1 WHO FERG report (2015) 2 FAO/WHO. 2014. Multicriteria-based ranking for risk management of food-borne parasites. Microbiological Risk Assessment Series No. 23. Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3649e.pdf and http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/mra_23/en/ 3 Principles and Guidelines for the conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (MRM) (CAC/GL 63-2007). -- 2 of 11 -- CAC/GL 88-2016 3 SECTION 2 - SCOPE, USE AND DEFINITION 2.1 Scope These guidelines for the control of foodborne parasites are applicable to all foods especially those foods identified in the FAO/WHO report, from primary production through consumption. They should complement guidelines in place for any other pathogens (e.g. bacteria and viruses). Control measures should be applied to parasite hazards in proportion to the public health risk. Countries in which specific parasites are endemic should take special measures to reduce the identified risk. Section 3 is subdivided into four food categories: i) Meat and meat products, ii) Milk and milk products, iii) Fish and fishery products, iv) Fresh fruits and vegetables. The Scope of these categories is the same as provided in the following codes:  Meat and Meat products: Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005), especially raw or undercooked meat.  Milk and Milk products: Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CAC/RCP 57-2004), especially, unpasteurized milk and milk products.  Fish and Fishery products: Code of Practice for Fish and Fishery Products (CAC/RCP 52-2003), especially, raw or undercooked fish and fishery products.  Fresh Fruits and Vegetables: Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 53- 2003), especially fruits and vegetables consumed raw or undercooked. The remaining sections contain guidelines applicable to the food chain after primary production (i.e. processing, food service, home preparation, and consumption), but are not subdivided into food categories. 2.2 Use These guidelines follow the format of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969) and should be used in conjunction with it and other relevant codes of practice such as:  Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005),  Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CAC/RCP 57-2004),  Code of Practice for Fish and Fishery Products (CAC/RCP 52-2003),  Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 53-2003). The World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) develops standards for the prevention, detection and control of some foodborne parasites at the primary production stage. Therefore, these guidelines should also be used in conjunction with relevant Articles of the OIE Codes and Manuals and the OIE/FAO guide to Good Farming Practices for Animal Production Food Safety. Flexibility in application of the Guidelines is important. They are primarily intended for use by government risk managers and industry in the design and implementation of food control systems. 2.3 Definitions Definitions relevant to these guidelines include: Fish4 Aquaculture4 Feed5 Fish farm4 Cyst – A transmission stage of a parasite that can cause infection when consumed. Environmental cysts are resistant to outside conditions and can be transferred with soil, dust, and water to food. Tissue cysts are located within animal tissues. 4 Code of Practice for Fish and Fishery Products (CAC/RCP 52-2003) 5 Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CAC/RCP 54-2004) -- 3 of 11 -- CAC/GL 88-2016 4 Foodborne Parasite – Any parasite that can be transmitted to humans by ingesting food. Host – An organism which harbours the parasite. Larvae – Immature form of helminths, before the development of the mature stage. Larvae can be infective or not. Oocyst – The environmental, developmental stage of coccidian parasites, produced through sexual reproduction in the definitive host. Oocysts can be infective or not when produced or shed. SECTION 3 - PRIMARY PRODUCTION It is necessary to conduct a hazard analysis to identify the foodborne parasite hazards that could be present in the feed and food production environment and that may contaminate foods during primary production. Control of parasites during primary production is particularly important when subsequent control steps during processing may not be adequate to eliminate the hazard or reduce it to an acceptable level. Sources of parasitic contamination of food and food producing animals at the primary production site include feed, water, soil, workers, untreated manure, sludge or fertilizers contaminated by faeces of human and/or domestic and wild animals, or proximity to other activities which could result in run-off or flooding with contaminated water. Therefore, attention to water quality throughout the food-chain, from primary production through processing to consumption is very important. In addition to the above, food-producing animals feeding on other live and dead animals (e.g. mammals, fish, birds, invertebrates), are important sources of parasitic infections. Farm workers in endemic areas may be infected with parasites without feeling ill or showing any symptoms. In order to minimize the probability for contamination of the production environment with parasitic stages from human faeces, on-farm sanitary facilities should be installed and used, e.g. functional latrines in the field that do not leak contaminants into the primary production area, and an adequate means of hygienically washing (e.g. scrubbing under running water) and drying hands. Waste from sanitary facilities should be hygienically disposed of in such a way as to eliminate contact of potentially infectious faeces with animals or pasture land. A. Meat and Meat Products Important meat-transmitted foodborne parasites include, but are not limited to, Taenia solium (pigs), Toxoplasma gondii (pigs, cattle, chickens, sheep, goats, horses, game), Trichinella spiralis (pigs, horses, game) and other Trichinella spp. (pigs, horses and game), Taenia saginata (cattle), Sarcocystis spp. (pigs, cattle) and Spirometra spp.(fish, reptiles, and amphibians). Certain foodborne parasites present in domestic animals may be transmitted to food of plant origin via faecal contamination (e.g. Echinococcus spp., Cryptosporidium spp., Fasciola spp. and Giardia duodenalis.) These parasites are not associated with human illness from consumption of meat, however they should be controlled in animal production in order to interrupt their life cycle. For information on specific food vehicles for these parasites, see Table 2 in FAO/WHO report on Multicriteria-Based Ranking for Risk Management of Food-Borne Parasites2. 3.1 Environmental hygiene Refer to Section 3.1 of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), and Section 5.5 of the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005) and the relevant Chapters of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code6 . Faeces of domestic and wild animals (e.g. Toxoplasma oocysts in felids), as well as human faeces (e.g. Taenia eggs), may contain parasites that are infective to domestic food-producing animals. Some parasites may also be transmitted to domestic animals or other animal hosts when these animals eat infected tissues from other animals. Where parasites will not be controlled at a later processing stage, the feasibility of controlling environmental introduction of foodborne parasites during primary production with available methods should be determined before primary production begins. The risk associated with the introduction of organic material (e.g. faecal and other material that may contain oocysts or eggs) from non-food-producing animals into the production environment should also be assessed. Game meat may contain parasites that infect humans directly or via the infection of livestock. The environment of wild animals and open range domesticated animals cannot be controlled, therefore, mitigation measures should be in place to minimize the risk at a later stage in the food chain. 6 Refer to the OIE website: http://www.oie.int/en/international-standard-setting/terrestrial-code/access-online/ -- 4 of 11 -- CAC/GL 88-2016 5 3.2 Hygienic production of food sources For information related to the control of parasites related to animal feed, refer to the Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CAC/RCP 54-2004), Sections 4, 5 and 6.5 of the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005), and the relevant Chapters of the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code, and the WHO/FAO/OIE Guidelines for the surveillance, prevention and control of taeniosis/cysticercosis 7 , and FAO/WHO/OIE Guidelines for the surveillance, management, prevention and control of trichinellosis8. Where indicated by a hazard analysis, control measures and/or hygienic practices should be implemented that prevent foodborne parasites from contaminating foods or infecting food animals during primary production, or that reduce contamination to an acceptable level. Fully enclosed animal housing systems, or other systems that prevent intrusions of potentially contaminated small animals or unauthorized people, combined with other good production practices, can be effective in controlling foodborne parasite hazards in meat, since such systems have been demonstrated to be effective for a number of parasites (e.g. Trichinella spp., Toxoplasma). Feed should be effectively protected against rodents (e.g. Trichinella spp. control), cats (e.g. Toxoplasma gondii control) and other animals. All dead animals should be immediately removed from feed storage and food-producing animal production areas and disposed of in a safe manner. Primary producers should supply water that is not a significant source of transmission of foodborne parasites to food-producing animals and to the extent possible block access of food producing animals to 