GUIDELINES FOR THE SIMPLE EVALUATION OF DIETARY EXPOSURE TO FOOD ADDITIVES CAC/GL 3-1989 Adopted 1989. Revision 2014 (formerly Guidelines for the Simple Evaluation of Food Additive Intake) -- 1 of 12 -- CAC/GL 3-1989 2 1. INTRODUCTION The General Standard for Food Additives (GSFA) states in its Preamble that the use of food additives is justified only when such use has an advantage, does not present an appreciable health risk to consumers, does not mislead the consumer, and serves one or more technological functions. The quantity of a food additive added to food shall be limited to the lowest level necessary to achieve the intended technical effect1, according to the basic principle of the Good Manufacture Practice (GMP). In regard to protecting the health of the consumers, principles for risk analysis have been applied in the framework of the Codex Alimentarius. Risk analysis has been defined by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) as a process consisting of three closely linked components: risk assessment, risk management and risk communication 2 . Risk assessment is defined as a scientifically based process consisting of the following steps: 1) hazard identification, 2) hazard characterization, 3) exposure assessment and 4) risk characterization3. The Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) is primarily responsible for performing the risk assessments upon which Codex Committee on Food Additives (CCFA) and ultimately the CAC base their risk management decision4. On an international level, the first step in the consideration of the safety assessment of food additives is an evaluation by JECFA, including the establishment of an Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI), where relevant, and the elaboration of their identity and purity criteria. The ADI is an estimate of the amount of a food additive in food or beverages expressed on a body weight (bw) basis that can be ingested daily over a lifetime without appreciable health risk to the consumer5. It is derived on the basis of all the known facts at the time of the evaluation. The ADI is expressed in milligrams of the food additive per kilogram of body weight6 on a daily basis. JECFA evaluates the estimated dietary exposures and, in the risk characterization step, compares the probable exposure to the food additive with the relevant ADI7. In the second step, proposals for the permitted use of an additive in different foods are made by the responsible national authorities or by the Codex Commodity Committees to the CCFA. The endorsement of the proposed use by the CCFA should take into account the ADI, or an equivalent health based guidance value, established for the additive by JECFA and the probable daily dietary exposure to the additive from all food sources. When the food additive is to be used in foods eaten by special groups of consumers (e.g., diabetics, those on special medical diets, sick individuals on formulated liquid diets), account shall be taken of the probable daily dietary exposure to the food additive by those consumers. There are different approaches for estimating the probable daily dietary exposure to food additives. Some of these approaches are very expensive and time consuming and may pose difficulties to some countries in initiating such dietary exposure assessments for food additives. Therefore, the present guidelines are intended to facilitate the work of governments, particularly for countries with limited resources, on the assessment of dietary exposure to food additives by reflecting current procedures in place to carry out such work in a simple way. The present guidelines are not intended to provide support to CCFA on the work on the GSFA, as JECFA is the international expert scientific advisory body to provide such advice to the Committee based on the Principles and Methods for The Risk Assessment of Chemicals in Food - Environmental Health Criteria (EHC) 240. 1 Preamble to the General Standard for Food Additives (GSFA; CODEX STAN 192-1995, available at www.codexalimentarius.org/codex-home/en/ under the “Standards” menu). 2 Codex Alimentarius Commission Procedural Manual (21st Ed.) Section IV: Risk Analysis, Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in the framework of the Codex Alimentarius, pp. 107 - 113. 3 Codex Alimentarius Commission Procedural Manual (21st Ed.) Section IV: Risk Analysis, Definitions of Risk Analysis Terms Related to Food Safety, pp. 114 -115. 4 Codex Alimentarius Commission Procedural Manual (21st Ed.) Section IV: Risk Analysis, “Risk Analysis Principles Applied by the Codex Committee on Food Additives”, pp. 116-120. 5 For this purpose, "without appreciable risk" is taken to mean the practical certainty that injury will not result even after a life-time's exposure (Preamble to the GSFA; CODEX STAN 192-1995). 6 The methods used to establish health-based guidance value such as an ADI are described in Chapter 5 of the publication Principles and Methods for the Risk Assessment of Chemicals in Food - Environmental Health Criteria 240 (EHC 240; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, 2009; www.who.int/foodsafety/chem/principles/en/index1.html) Chapter 5. 7 JECFA´s monographs are available at http://www.fao.org/food/food-safety-quality/scientific-advice/jecfa/jecfa- additives/en/. -- 2 of 12 -- CAC/GL 3-1989 3 2. DIETARY EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT Dietary exposure assessment8 combines food consumption data and the concentration of the food additive in food. The resulting dietary exposure estimate may then be compared with the ADI for the food additive, if available, as part of the risk characterization. Three elements must be taken into account in assessing the dietary exposure to a food additive: (1) the concentration of the food additive in food; (2) the amount of food consumed; and (3) the average body weight of the population (kg). The general equation for dietary exposure is: Dietary exposure = Σ (Concentration of food additive in food × Food consumption) Body weight (kg) There are different methods for estimating probable dietary exposure 9 . The method used should be appropriate for the purpose, clearly stated and reproducible. Information about the model and data sources used, assumptions, limitations and uncertainties should also be documented. National or regional data should be used whenever possible. A stepwise approach is recommended in which screening methods based on conservative assumptions can be applied to identify those of no safety concern that may be present, among the large number of food additives using minimal resources in the shortest possible time. If no safety concerns are identified10, no additional exposure assessment is required. Where potential safety concerns are identified, the subsequent steps of the framework provide methods that incorporate increasingly specific and refined data (as they also require more resources). The screening methods should overestimate dietary exposure of high consumers by using conservative assumptions for food consumption and food additive concentration. This overestimation will avoid situations where the dietary exposure estimated by the screening process may erroneously indicate no safety concern (i.e., underestimate exposure, particularly for high consumers). However, in order to effectively screen food additives and establish risk assessment priorities, the first steps of the procedure should not consider unsustainable diets, or the results will be too unrealistic to be useful. At a minimum, physiological limits of food consumption should be taken into account11. If the existence of a safety concern cannot be ruled out on the basis of dietary exposure assessed at the initial steps, more refined assessments of dietary exposure may be needed. Refinements to a point estimate would include less conservative assumptions based on more specific information about the foods consumed. For example, the use of market share data to identify specific types or brands of food to refine the amount of food consumed; the use of actual levels of additive in foods obtained fromthe food industry and/or laboratory analysis to refine the concentration of the food additive in food; and consideration of the impact of food processing and preparation. Considering the aim of this guideline, two approaches have been proposed for a simple evaluation of dietary exposure to food additives: Theoretical Maximum Daily Intake (TMDI) and Estimated Daily Intake (EDI). 2.1 Theoretical Maximum Daily Intake (TMDI) The TMDI is calculated by multiplying the average per capita12daily food consumption for each food by the maximum use level (ML)13of the food additive established by national regulations or contained in the GSFA14 or by the proposed use levels by the food industry and summing the resulting exposure values to give total dietary exposure. 8 The use of standard terminology is recommended to ensure consistent application and understanding. It is recommended that “consumption” be used to refer to the amount of food consumed and “dietary exposure” to the amount of food additive ingested via food. The term “dietary exposure” is used synonymously with the term “dietary intake”, depending upon existing regulatory frameworks or other related considerations. Food also includes beverages, drinking-water and food supplements (EHC 240, Chapter 6, p. 3). 9 For more detailed information on the dietary exposure assessment methods, see EHC 240, Chapter 6 10 For this purpose, there is no safety concern if the estimated dietary exposure to a food additive does not exceed its ADI value. 11 EHC 240, Chapter 6, p. 45. The budget method is recognized as an initial screening approach to assess exposure based on physiological limit. 12 The per capita food consumption data represents the food intake by the entire population of a country. For most foods, only a certain percentage of the population will consume that food. Therefore, the per capita food consumption includes “eaters” as well as “non-eaters” of that food. As such, the amount of food consumed on a per capita basis will generally be lower than the “eaters-only” amount (i.e., the amount of food consumed only by those individuals who actually consumed the food). In the case where the entire population consumes the food, the per capita and “eaters-only” food consumption amount will be the same. 13 Maximum Use Level of an additive is the highest concentration of the additive determined to be functionally effective in a food or food category and agreed to be safe by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. It is generally expressed as -- 3 of 12 -- CAC/GL 3-1989 4 The TMDI only approximates the dietary exposure to a food additive since it does not take into consideration the food consumption by special populations groups. This approach assumes that: (a) all foods in which a food additive is permitted contain that additive; (b) the food additive is always present at the ML; (c) the foods in question containing the additive are consumed by people every day of their lives at the mean per capita level; (d) the amount of the food additive in the food does not change as a result of storage, cooking or processing techniques; (e) all foods permitted to contain the food additive are ingested and nothing is discarded. 2.2 Estimated Daily Intake (EDI) The EDI of a food additive is the amount of an additive ingested by the average consumer of the food based on a) the actual use of the additive by industry, or b) if the food additive is used according to Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), an approximation as close as possible to the actual uses levels. 3. DATA AVAILABLE The first step is to identify and collect all data available in the country and check if these data can provide sufficient information (i.e., concentration of the food additive in food, food consumption data and body weights of the population of interest) to assess the dietary exposure to the food additive. It is recommended to use national data on food additive concentrations, food consumption and body weight, and international toxicological reference values15.National toxicological reference values may also be used, if available. 3.1 Concentration of the food additives in food The type of data required for assessing dietary exposure for food additives is determined by the objective of the assessment. Dietary exposure can be assessed for a food additive before it has been approved for use (pre-regulation) or after it has been in the food supply for years (post-regulation). In a pre-regulation exposure assessment, food additive concentration data should be available from or estimated by the manufacturer. MLs established for food additives by national authorities can be used in post regulation dietary exposure assessments. In the absence of a national regulation for the use of the food additive, the assessment can be conducted using the MLs in the GSFA14. It is recognized that the use of these MLs will overestimate the dietary exposure to a food additive because it is not typical that a person would consume all foods containing the food additive at the corresponding ML. In a post-regulation exposure assessment, in addition to all pre-regulation data sources, information on the specific foods containing the food additive in the market and the actual use levels of the food additives in those foods may be obtained from food manufacturers or food processors. Available analytical data on the concentrations of the food additive in food may also be used to more realistically estimate the levels of the food additive likely to be found in the diet as consumed. These data can be derived from monitoring and surveillance data on food. When using data provided by national authorities as well as other sources in international exposure assessments, it is important, whenever possible, to have detailed information on the data source, survey type or design, sampling procedures, sample preparation, analytical method, analytical parameters such as limit of detection (LOD) or limit of quantification (LOQ), and quality assurance procedures, as applicable to the assessment methodology. mg additive/kg of food.” (Preamble to the GSFA; CODEX STAN 192-1995).The ML may similarly be established by national authorities. 14 The use of the MLs established in the GSFA will necessarily overestimate the exposure to a food additive from its use in a given food. The MLs in the GSFA are acceptable MLs that “... will not usually correspond to the optimum, recommended, or typical level of use. Under GMP, the optimum, recommended, or typical use level will differ for each application of an additive and is dependent on the intended technical effect and the specific food in which the additive would be used, taking into account the type of raw material, food processing and post-manufacture storage, transport and handling by distributors, retailers, and consumers.”(Preamble to the GSFA; CODEX