CAC/GL 78-2011 Page 1 of 26 GUIDELINES FOR THE CONTROL OF CAMPYLOBACTER AND SALMONELLA IN CHICKEN MEAT CAC/GL 78-2011 Table of contents 1. Introduction 2. Objectives 3. Scope and use of the guidelines 3.1 Scope 3.2 Use 4. Definitions 5. Principles applying to control of Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat 6. Risk profiles 7. Primary production-to-consumption approach to control measures 7.1 Generic flow diagram for application of control measures 7.2 Availability of control measures 8. Control measures for Steps 1 to 11 (Primary Production) 9. Control measures for Steps 12 to 24 (Processing) 10. Control measures for Steps 25 to 30 (Distribution Channels) 11. Risk-based Control Measures 11.1 Development of Risk-based Control Measures 11.2 Availability of a Web-Based Decision Support Tool 12. Implementation of control measures 12.1 Validation of Control Measures 12.2 Prior to Validation 12.3 Validation 12.4 Implementation 12.5 Verification of Control Measures 13. Monitoring and review 13.1 Monitoring 13.2 Review -- 1 of 26 -- CAC/GL 78-2011 Page 2 of 26 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Campylobacteriosis and salmonellosis are the two most frequently reported food borne diseases worldwide and chicken meat is considered to be one of the most important food vehicles. The burden of the diseases and the cost of control measures are highly significant in many countries and contamination with zoonotic Campylobacter and Salmonella1 has the potential to severely disrupt trade between countries. 2. The Guidelines apply a risk management framework (RMF) approach as advocated in the Codex Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management (MRM) (CAC/GL 63-2007). “Preliminary Risk Management Activities” and “Identification and Selection of Risk Management Options” are represented by the guidance developed for control measures at each step in the food chain. Following sections on “Implementation” and “Monitoring” complete application of all the components of the RMF. 3. The Guidelines build on general food hygiene provisions already established in the Codex system and develop potential control measures specific for Campylobacter and Salmonella of public health relevance in chicken meat. In this context, the Guidelines give effect to the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) commitment to developing standards that are based on sound science and risk assessment 2 . Potential control measures for application at single or multiple steps are presented in the following categories: • Good hygienic practice (GHP) - based. They are generally qualitative in nature and are based on empirical scientific knowledge and experience. They are usually prescriptive and may differ considerably between countries. • Hazard-based. They are developed from scientific knowledge of the likely level of control of a hazard at a step (or series of steps) in a food chain, have a quantitative base in the prevalence and/or concentration of Campylobacter or Salmonella, and can be validated as to their efficacy in hazard control at the step. The benefit of a hazard-based measure cannot be exactly determined without a specific risk assessment; however, any significant reduction in pathogen prevalence and / or concentration is expected to provide significant human health benefit.3 4. Examples of control measures that are based on quantitative levels of hazard control have been subjected to a rigorous scientific evaluation and review in development of the Guidelines. Such examples are illustrative only and their use and approval may vary amongst member countries. Their inclusion in the Guidelines illustrates the value of a quantitative approach to hazard reduction throughout the food chain and, where the web-based decision tool is applied, the likely level of public health protection that may result from particular food-chain scenarios and choices of control measures at the national level. 5. The Guidelines are presented in a flow diagram format so as to enhance practical application of a primary production-to-consumption approach to food safety. This format: • Demonstrates differences and commonalities in approach for control measures for Campylobacter and Salmonella. • Illustrates relationships between control-measures applied at different steps in the food chain. • Highlights data gaps in terms of scientific justification / validation for GHP-based control measures. • Facilitates development of HACCP plans at individual premises and national levels. 1 Human pathogens of public health relevance only. For the purposes of this document, all references to Salmonella and Campylobacter relate only to human pathogens. 2 Objective 2 “Promoting widest application of scientific principles and risk analysis” of the Codex Strategic Plan 2008- 2013 and the first Statement of Principle relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment “Health and safety aspects of Codex decisions and recommendations should be based on a risk assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances” Codex Procedural Manual.,- 3 JEMRA, 2002. Risk Assessments of Salmonella in Eggs and Broiler Chickens. FAO/WHO Microbial Risk Assessment Series No. 2. Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee for Microbial Risk Assessment. JEMRA, 2009. Risk Assessment of Campylobacter spp in Broiler Chickens, Technical Report. FAO/WHO Microbial Risk Assessment Series No. 12 Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee for Microbial Risk Assessment -- 2 of 26 -- CAC/GL 78-2011 Page 3 of 26 • Assists in judging the equivalence4 of control measures for chicken meat applied in different countries. 6. In doing so, the Guidelines provide flexibility for use at the national (and individual primary production and processing) level. 2. OBJECTIVES 7. The primary objective of these Guidelines is to provide information to governments and industry on the control of Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat to reduce foodborne disease from this source whilst ensuring fair practices in the international food trade. The Guidelines provide a scientifically sound international tool for robust application of GHP- and hazard-based approaches to control of Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat according to national risk management decisions. 8. It is not the intention of the Guidelines to set quantitative limits for Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat in international trade. Rather, the Guidelines follow the example of the overarching Codex Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005) and provide an “enabling” framework which countries can utilise to establish control measures appropriate to their national situation. 3. SCOPE AND USE OF THE GUIDELINES 3.1. Scope 9. These Guidelines apply to control of all Campylobacter and Salmonella that may contaminate chicken meat (Gallus gallus) and cause food borne disease. The primary focus is on chicken meat in the form of broiler carcasses and portions, with the exclusion of offals. These Guidelines can be applied to other classes of chickens, e.g. end-of-lays, as appropriate. 10. The Guidelines apply to all steps in a “primary production-to-consumption” food chain for chicken meat produced in typical “industrial’ systems. While the biosecurity provisions in this document have been developed primarily for controlled-environment housing systems they also have applicability to other housing systems. 3.2. Use 11. The Guidelines develop specific guidance for control of Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat according to a “primary production-to-consumption” food chain approach, with potential control measures being considered at each step, or group of steps, in the process flow. The Guidelines are supplementary to and should be used in conjunction with the Code of Practice – General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1 – 1969), the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005), the Code of Practice for the Processing and Handling of Quick Frozen Foods (CAC/RCP 8-1976) and the Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding (CAC/RCP 54-2004). These general and overarching provisions are referenced as appropriate in the Guidelines and their content is not duplicated in these Guidelines. 12. The Guidelines systematically present GHP-based control measures and examples of hazard-based control measures. GHP is a pre-requisite to making choices on hazard-based control measures. Examples of hazard-based control measures are limited to those that have been scientifically evaluated as being effective under conditions of commercial use. Where no quantifiable outcome is mentioned for a specific control measure, it should be kept in mind that the effect may be different between Salmonella and Campylobacter. Countries should note that these hazard-based control measures are indicative only and the references provided should be reviewed to assist application. The quantifiable outcomes reported for control measures are specific to the conditions of particular studies and would need to be validated under local commercial conditions to provide a meaningful estimate of hazard reduction5 . Government and industry can use choices on hazard-based control measures to inform decisions on critical control points (CCPs) when applying HACCP principles to a particular food process. 4 Codex Guidelines on the Judgement of Equivalence of Sanitary Measures Associated with Food Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 53-2003). 5 FAO/WHO, 2009. Technical Meeting on Salmonella and Campylobacter in chicken meat. 4-8 May 2009, Rome, Italy. -- 3 of 26 -- CAC/GL 78-2011 Page 4 of 26 13. Several hazard-based control measures as presented in these Guidelines are based on the use of chemical decontaminants to reduce the prevalence and/or concentration of Campylobacter and/or Salmonella in broiler carcasses. The use of these control measures, including chemical decontaminants where relevant, in the primary production-to-consumption food chain, is subject to approval by the competent authority, where appropriate. Also these Guidelines do not preclude any other choice of a hazard-based control measure that is not included in the examples. 14. Provision of flexibility in application of the Guidelines is an important attribute. They are primarily intended for use by government risk managers and industry in the design and implementation of food safety control systems. 15. The Guidelines should be useful when judging the equivalence of different food safety measures for chicken meat in different countries 4. DEFINITIONS Batch A subset of a flock. A group of chickens sent together to a slaughterhouse at the same time. Broiler Birds of the species Gallus gallus selectively bred and reared for their meat rather than eggs. Chicken Birds of the species Gallus gallus. Competitive exclusion 6 The administration of defined 7 or undefined bacterial flora to poultry to prevent gut colonisation by enteropathogens, including Salmonella. Crate Container used to transport live chickens. Epidemiological unit 6 A group of animals with a defined epidemiological relationship that share approximately the same likelihood of exposure to a pathogen. This may be because they share a common environment (e.g. animals in a pen), or because of common management practices. Usually, this is a herd or a flock. However, an epidemiological unit may also refer to groups such as animals belonging to residents of a village, or animals sharing a communal animal handling facility. The epidemiological relationship may differ from disease to disease, or even strain to strain of the pathogen. Establishment 6 The premises in which animals are kept. Flock 6 A number of animals of one kind kept together under human control or a congregation of gregarious wild animals. For the purposes of the Terrestrial Code, a flock is usually regarded as an epidemiological unit. Module A structure containing crates / cages that facilitates loading and unloading. On-line Reprocessing Additional washing step that may be used (instead of trimming or washing off-line) as a control measure for faecal or ingesta contamination. Partial depopulation Incomplete harvest of chickens from a growing flock. Total depopulation Full harvest of chickens from a growing flock. 6 This definition is taken directly from the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code. www.oie.int 7 Probiotics are defined competitive exclusion products -- 4 of 26 -- CAC/GL 78-2011 Page 5 of 26 5. PRINCIPLES APPLYING TO CONTROL OF CAMPYLOBACTER AND SALMONELLA IN CHICKEN MEAT 16. Overarching principles for good hygienic practice for meat are presented in the Code of Hygienic Practice for Meat (CAC/RCP 58-2005) section 4: General Principles of Meat Hygiene. Two principles that have particularly been taken into account in these Guidelines are: i. The principles of food safety risk analysis should be incorporated wherever possible and appropriate in the control of Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat from primary production to consumption ii. Wherever possible and practical, Competent Authorities should formulate risk management metrics 8 so as to objectively express the level of control of Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat that is required to meet public health goals. 6. RISK PROFILES 17. Risk profiles are an important part of “Preliminary Risk Management Activities” when applying a RMF to a food safety issue. They provide scientific information to risk managers and industry in the design of food safety control systems that are tailor-made to individual food production and processing systems. 18. The contents of these Guidelines are predicated on two extensive risk profiles on Salmonella and Campylobacter in broiler chicken: o Food Safety Risk Profile for Salmonella species in broiler (young) chicken, June 20079 o Food Safety Risk Profile for Campylobacter species in broiler (young) chicken, June 200710 7. PRIMARY PRODUCTION-TO-CONSUMPTION APPROACH TO CONTROL MEASURES 19. These Guidelines incorporate a “primary production-to-consumption” flow diagram approach so as to identify all steps in the food chain where control measures can potentially be applied. It facilitates a systematic approach to the identification and evaluation of all potential control measures. Consideration of all steps in the food chain allows different combinations of control measures to be developed. This is particularly important where differences occur in primary production and processing systems between countries and risk managers need the flexibility to choose risk management options that are appropriate in the national context. 7.1. Generic flow diagram for application of control measures 20. A generic flow diagram is presented in sequence on the following pages. 21. Individual premises will have variations in process flow and should adapt design of HACCP plans accordingly. Process Flow Diagram 1: Primary production to Consumption 1. Manage grandparent11 flocks Ø 2. Transport eggs to hatchery Ø 3. Parent Hatchery Ø 4. Transport day-o