PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR NATIONAL FOOD CONTROL SYSTEMS CAC/GL 82-2013 SECTION 1 INTRODUCTION 1. This document is intended to provide practical guidance to assist the national government, and their competent authority1 in the design, development, operation, evaluation and improvement of the national food control system. It highlights the key principles and core elements of an efficient and effective food control system. It is not intended that the guidance results in “one system” being appropriate to all circumstances. Rather, various approaches may be used, as appropriate to the national circumstances, to achieve an effective national food control system. 2. While the focus of the Principles and Guidelines for National Food Control Systems is on the production, packing, storage, transport, handling and sale of foods within national borders, the document is consistent with and should be read in conjunction with relevant Codex texts. Codex texts of particular relevance include the Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CAC/GL 20-1995), the Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CAC/GL 26-1997), the Guidelines for Food Import Control Systems (CAC/GL 47-2003) and the Guidelines for the Exchange of Information between countries on rejections of imported foods (CAC/GL 25-1997). Reference to these texts relating to food import and export control is important since, while the national food control system is ultimately responsible for the safety of food offered within its border, in today’s global market, much food is sourced from outside the country; hence, properly designed import and export control systems, as part of the overall national food control system, are essential. 3. In addition, the relevant chapters of the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) Terrestrial Animal Health Code and Aquatic Animal Health Code are valuable resources for member governments and organizations. Documents and guidance material developed by FAO and WHO may also be useful resources2. 4. A competent authority may apply these principles and guidelines, where appropriate, according to their particular situations. 5. When developing a national food control system national governments and their competent authority should ensure that the objectives of the system are addressed as outlined in the principles below and should allow for flexibility and modification as required to ensure the objectives can be achieved. SECTION 2 OBJECTIVE OF A NATIONAL FOOD CONTROL SYSTEM 6. The objective of a national food control system is to protect the health of consumers and ensure fair practices in the food trade. SECTION 3 PRINCIPLES OF A NATIONAL FOOD CONTROL SYSTEM 7. A national food control system should be based on the following principles: PRINCIPLE 1 PROTECTION OF CONSUMERS 8. National food control systems should be designed, implemented and maintained with the primary goal to protect consumers. In the event of a conflict with other interests, precedence should be given to protecting the health of consumers. PRINCIPLE 2 THE WHOLE FOOD CHAIN APPROACH 9. The national food control system should cover the entire food chain from primary production to consumption. PRINCIPLE 3 TRANSPARENCY 10. All aspects of a national food control system should be transparent and open to scrutiny by all stakeholders, while respecting legal requirements to protect confidential information as appropriate. Transparency considerations apply to all participants in the food chain and this can be achieved through clear documentation and communication. PRINCIPLE 4 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 11. All participants in a national food control system should have specific roles and responsibilities clearly defined. 12. Food business operators3 have the primary role and responsibility for managing the food safety of their products and for complying with requirements relating to those aspects of food under their control. 13. The national government (and in some cases a competent authority) has the role and responsibility to establish and maintain up to date legal requirements. The competent authority has the responsibility to ensure the effective operation of the national food control system. 14. Consumers also have a role in managing food safety risks under their control and where relevant should be provided with information on how to achieve this. 15. Academics and scientific institutions have a role in contributing to a national food control system, as they are a source of expertise to support the risk based and scientific foundation of such a system. 1 Throughout the document “competent authority” refers to one or more competent authorities as appropriate 2 http://www.fao.orf/food/food-safety-quality/publications-tools/food-safety-publications/en/ 3 For the purpose of this document food business operator includes producers, processors, wholesalers, distributors, importers, exporters and retailers -- 1 of 10 -- CAC/GL 82-2013 2 PRINCIPLE 5 CONSISTENCY AND IMPARTIALITY 16. All aspects of a national food control system should be applied consistently and impartially. The competent authority and all participants acting in official functions should be free of improper or undue influence or conflict of interest. PRINCIPLE 6 RISK BASED, SCIENCE BASED AND EVIDENCE BASED DECISION MAKING 17. A competent authority should make decisions within a national food control system based on scientific information, evidence and/or risk analysis principles4 as appropriate. PRINCIPLE 7 COOPERATION AND COORDINATION BETWEEN MULTIPLE COMPETENT AUTHORITIES 18. The competent authorities within a national food control system should operate in a cooperative and coordinated manner, within clearly assigned roles and responsibilities, for the most effective use of resources in order to minimise duplication and/or gaps and to facilitate information exchange. PRINCIPLE 8 PREVENTIVE MEASURES 19. To prevent and when necessary to respond to food safety incidents a national food control system should encompass the core elements of prevention, intervention and response. PRINCIPLE 9 SELF ASSESSMENT AND REVIEW PROCEDURES 20. The national food control system should possess the capacity and capability to undergo continuous improvement and include mechanisms to evaluate whether the system is able to achieve its objective. PRINCIPLE 10 RECOGNITION OF OTHER SYSTEMS (INCLUDING EQUIVALENCE) 21. Competent authorities should recognise that food control systems or their components although designed and structured differently may be capable of meeting the same objective. This recognition can apply at the national and international level. The concept of recognition of systems, including equivalence5, should be provided for in the national food control system. PRINCIPLE 11 LEGAL FOUNDATION 22. The government within each country should have in place fundamental legal structures to enable the establishment of food laws and competent authorities, so that they can develop, establish, implement, maintain and enforce a national food control system. PRINCIPLE 12 HARMONISATION 23. When designing and applying a food control system, the competent authority should consider Codex standards, recommendations and guidelines whenever appropriate as elements of their national food control system to protect the health of consumers and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Standards, recommendations or guidelines from other international inter- governmental organisations whose membership is open to all countries may also be useful. PRINCIPLE 13 RESOURCES 24. A national food control system should have sufficient resources to enable it to meet the system’s objectives. SECTION 4 FRAMEWORK FOR THE DESIGN AND OPERATION OF THE NATIONAL FOOD CONTROL SYSTEM 25. The national food control system of a country will be based on that country’s particular governmental or constitutional arrangements and institutions, (e.g. presence or absence of sub national governments), national goals and objectives. 26. The competent authority has a pivotal role in the national food control system, in that the competent authority: • Provides leadership and coordination for the national food control system; • Designs, develops, operates, evaluates and improves the national food control system; • Establishes, implements and enforces science and risk based regulatory requirements that encourage and promote positive food safety outcomes; • Establishes, implements and enforces regulatory requirements supporting fair practices in the food trade; • Establishes and maintains arrangements with supporting organizations such as officially recognised inspection, audit, certification and accreditation bodies, where appropriate; • Advances and fosters knowledge, science, research and education regarding food safety; • Engages with stakeholders to ensure transparency and to obtain their views; and • Where appropriate, establishes and maintains arrangements with other countries e.g. cooperation programs, equivalence agreements etc. 4 In accordance with members obligations under the World Trade Organisation Agreements, risk analysis frameworks adopted by national governments in the context of a national food control system should be consistent with the Codex Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Food Safety for Application by Governments (CAC/GL 62-2007) and relevant risk analysis policies developed by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). 5 Guidelines for the development of equivalence agreements regarding food import and export inspection and certification systems (CAC/GL 34-1999) and Guidelines on the judgement of equivalence of sanitary measures associated with food inspection and certification systems (CAC/GL 53-2003). -- 2 of 10 -- CAC/GL 82-2013 3 27. Where there is more than one competent authority their roles and responsibilities should be clearly defined and their activities coordinated to the greatest extent possible to minimise gaps and overlaps. 28. The design and implementation of a national food control system should follow a logical and transparent process. This should include the consistent application of a systematic framework for the identification, evaluation and, as necessary, control of food safety risks associated with existing, new or re-emerging hazards. 29. In developing a national food control system the competent authority, in consultation with stakeholders, should adopt the following framework, which will reflect the principles of a national food control system and are described in Section 3 this document. Framework for the development of a national food control system SECTION 4.1 POLICY SETTING 30. Policy setting is the process by which the goals and objectives for the national food control system are established by governments, along with the commitment to a course of action to achieve those goals and objectives. It should also include the identification and clear articulation of expected outcomes. Policy decisions guide subsequent actions, including the establishment of legislation and regulations. 31. Public policy decisions should take into account a broad range of factors and require a careful assessment of options. Governments should consider, among other things, stakeholder interests, how the food control system will relate to international and national standards, assessment of risks and/or benefits, effectiveness and efficiency of various controls and methods of oversight, existing and planned government structures, coordination among authorities along the food chain, technical and scientific information, the roles of government and food business operators, and best practices/models. 32. The competent authority should actively engage stakeholders, including food business operators and consumers, in the setting of policy. 33. National goals and priorities will ensure consumer protection by taking into account amongst other things, food production and consumption patterns, risk profile and consumer concerns in relation to food safety and fair practices in the food trade and also the preparedness and capability of the country. 34. When establishing a national food control system countries should identify the main objectives to be addressed through the system for the short, medium and long term. The main objectives should be aligned with and assist in implementing the principles outlined in Section 3. Consideration should be given to the development of a national food control strategy, which will aid clarification of the objectives to be addressed set priorities and support system design. 35. Once public policy goals and desired outcomes for the national food control system are established, they should be clearly articulated and described in order to effectively guide subsequent actions. Policy Setting System Design Monitoring & System Review Implementation Continuous improvement -- 3 of 10 -- CAC/GL 82-2013 4 36. A national food control system should possess three main characteristics which, among other things, can be used in self-assessment or other evaluation to determine if the system is fully functional and effective: i) Characteristic 1 Situational awareness means that a national food control system avails itself of accurate and current information on the entire food chain. ii) Characteristic 2 Pro-activity means that a national food control system is capable of identifying existing or emerging hazards before they materialise as risks in the food production and/or processing chain and at the early stages rather than in the end product. Early warning and/or rapid alert systems, traceability and contingency planning for managing and preparing for potential food safety incidents should be an inherent part of a pro-active control system. iii) Characteristic 3 Continuous Improvement means that a national food control system should possess the capability to learn through a process of review and reform utilising mechanisms that check and evaluate whether the system is able to achieve its objectives. 37. Legislation6 should clearly reflect the intended policy objective and be commensurate with the risks they are intended to mitigate. Legislation should, where appropriate take into account relevant scientific information and focus on prevention and outcomes and thereby allowing flexibility and innovation. 38. In order to reflect national policies and strategies legislation should, amongst other things: • Frame the structure of the national food control system and its goals and objectives; • Provide clarity on the roles and responsibilities of participants in the national food control system, i.e. the central government, the competent authority (or of each competent authority where there is more than one), third party7 providers (where these are used), food business operators and other stakeholders as appropriate; • Set out the overarching