1 m o d e l e x p o r t c e r t i f i c at e f o r m i l k a n d m i l k p ro d u c t s (c ac /g l 67-2 0 0 8) MODEL EXPORT CERTIFICATE FOR MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS cac/gl 67-2008 introduction This document should be read in conjunction with the Guidelines for the Design, Production, Issuance and Use of Generic Official Certificates (CAC/GL 38-2001). scope The Model Export Certificate for Milk and Milk Products applies to milk, milk products and composite milk products as defined in General Standard for the Use of Dairy Terms (CODEX STAN 206-1999) presented for international trade that meet food safety and suitability requirements. The Model Export Certificate does not deal with matters of animal and plant health unless directly related to food safety or suitability. Where attestation on animal health matters is required, reference should be made to the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code. explanatorY notes on tHe model export certificate for milk and milk products general The certificate should be completed in a legible manner. Page numbering should be used where the certificate occupies more than one sheet of paper. For multiple page certificates the certifying officer should ensure that it is clear that the pages constitute a single certificate including official translation(s) when appropriate (e.g., each page is numbered with the same unique certificate number certificate number so as to indicate it is a particular page in a finite sequence). If the country of destination, consignee, point of entry, or transport details change after the certificate has been issued, it is the responsibility of the importer to advise the competent authority of the importing country. Such a change should not result in a request for a replacement certificate to be issued. The model certificate as it appears includes numbers designed to facilitate establishing a link between a particular section and the corresponding explanatory note. It is not intended that these numbers appear in the actual certificates issued by the certifying body. Adopted in 2008. Revision 2010. -- 1 of 5 -- 2 m i l k a n d m i l k p ro d u c t s (2 n d edit io n) specific Certificate type: the certificate should be marked with “ORIGINAL”, “COPY” or “REPLACEMENT” as appropriate. Country of Dispatch: the country of dispatch designates the name of the country of the competent authority which has the competence to verify and certify the conformity to the attestations. The relevant part of the country may be mentioned where this relates to specific attestations. 1. Consignor/Exporter: name and address (street, town and region/province/state, as applicable) of the natural or legal person or entity who sends the consignment. 2. Certificate number (No): is unique for each certificate and is authorized by the competent authority of the exporting country. This certificate number should appear on each page of the certificate. If there is an addendum, it must be clearly marked as such and must have the same identification number as the primary certificate and the signature of a certifying officer signing the sanitary certificate. 3. Competent authority: Name of the Competent Authority of the country responsible for certification. 4. Certifying body: Name of the Certifying Body when it is different from the Competent Authority. 5. Consignee/Importer: name and address of the natural or legal person or entity to whom the consignment is shipped in the country of destination, at the time the certificate is issued. 6. Country of origin1: where appropriate, name of the country in which the products were produced and/or manufactured. 7. Country of destination1: name of the country of destination of the products. 8. Place of loading: name of a seaport, airport, freight terminal, rail station or other place at which goods are loaded onto the means of transport being used for their carriage. 9. Means of transport: Air/ship/rail/road/other, as appropriate and the identification (name or number) of these if available, or relevant documentary references. 10. Declared point of entry: if required and available the name of the point of entry authorised by the competent authority of the importing country and, its UN/ LOCODE (refer to the United Nations Code for Trade and Transport Locations). 1 iso code: the two letter country codes, in compliance with the international standard (ISO 3166 alpha-2), could be used. -- 2 of 5 -- 3 m o d e l e x p o r t c e r t i f i c at e f o r m i l k a n d m i l k p ro d u c t s (c ac /g l 67-2 0 0 8) 11. Conditions for transport/storage: appropriate temperature category (ambient, chilled, frozen) or other requirements (e.g. humidity) for transport/storage of the product. 12. Total quantity: in appropriate units of weight or volume for the whole consignment 13. Identification of container(s)/Seal number(s): identify the containers and seal numbers where applicable or if known. 14. Total number of packages: total number of packages for all products in the consignment. 15. Identification of food product(s): give the descriptive information specific to the product or products to be certified. Identification is a description of the commodity and consignment to which the certificate uniquely relates, e.g., lot identifier or date coding, facilitating the traceability/product tracing of the product in the event of public health investigations and/or recalls. Where appropriate, or when required by the importing country: nature of the food (or description of the commodity), commodity code (HS code), intended purpose, producer/manufacturer, approval number of establishments (production plant, store (cold store or not)), region or compartment of origin, name of the product, lot identifier, date(s) of manufacture, date(s) of minimum durability2 , type of packaging, number of packages, net weight per type of product. • Nature of food - definition of the product according to Section 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 of the General Standard for the Use of Dairy Terms (CODEX STAN 206-1999). • Intended purpose (or Food products certified for) - the end use of the product should be specified in the certificate (e.g. direct human consumption, further processing, and trade samples). Where a certificate for trade samples is required, a consignment consisting of a food sample intended for evaluation, testing or research, in the importing country may be described using a term such as “trade samples”. It should be clearly indicated on the certificate or the package that the sample is not intended for retail sale and has no commercial value. • Approval number of establishment(s) - is the number assigned by the competent authority to the manufacturing establishment or factory where the milk product was produced. In case the consignment encompasses products from several manufacturing establishments or factories the approval number of each manufacturing establishment and/or factory should be mentioned. 2 As provided in Section 4.7.1 of the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CODEX STAN 1-1995). -- 3 of 5 -- 4 m i l k a n d m i l k p ro d u c t s (2 n d edit io n) • Region or compartment of origin - if applicable. This is only for products affected by regionalisation measures or by the setting up of approved zones or compartments. • Name of the product - The information appearing in this section should be consistent with the name of the food and the trade name (where one is used) as presented on the label and should be sufficient to identify the food. Where a certificate for trade samples is required a consignment consisting of a food sample intended for evaluation, testing or research, in the importing country may be described using a term such as “trade samples”. It should be clearly indicated on the certificate or the package that the sample is not intended for retail sale and has no commercial value. • Lot(s)3 identifier - is the lot identification system developed by a processor to account for their production of milk and milk products thereby facilitating the traceability/product tracing of the product in the event of public health investigations and/or recalls. • Type of packaging - identify the type of packaging of products. 16. Attestation: the wording provided in the model certificate is an internationally agreed text that is recommended for use for milk and milk products, and which reflects provisions in paragraphs 15 and 16 of the Guidelines for the Design, Production, Issuance and Use of Generic Official Certificates (CAC/GL 38-2001). The attestation is a statement confirming that the product or batches of products originate from an establishment that is in good regulatory standing with the Competent Authority in the exporting country and that the products were processed and otherwise handled under a HACCP System, where appropriate, and that the food complies with the hygiene requirements of the country (to be agreed upon with the importing country) and/or the hygienic provisions of the Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CAC/RCP 57-2004). The importing country should provide the exporting country with its provisions by precise and complete documents in a language agreed between the importing and exporting countries when it is required to meet the requirements of the importing country. 17. Certifying officer - name, official position, official stamp (optional), date of signature and signature. 3 Lot means a definitive quantity of a commodity produced essentially under the same conditions (General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods - CODEX STAN 1-1985). -- 4 of 5 -- 5 m o d e l e x p o r t c e r t i f i c at e f o r m i l k a n d m i l k p ro d u c t s (c ac /g l 67-2 0 0 8) logo/letterhead model export certificate for milk and milk products country of dispatch: certificate type 1. Consignor/exporter: 2. Certificate number: 3. Competent authority: 4. Certifying body: 5. Consignee/importer: 6. Country of origin: ISO code: 7. Country of destination: ISO code: 8. Place of loading: 9. Means of transport: 10. Declared point of entry: 11. Conditions for transport/storage: 12. Total quantity:* 13. Identification of container(s)/seal number(s): 14. Total number of packages: 15. Identification of food products as described below (multiple lines may be used for multiple products): No. Nature of the food: Intended purpose No. Producer/ manufacturer: Approval number of establishment*: Region or compartment of origin: No. Name of the product Lot identifier* Type of packaging Number of packages: Net weight: No. Date of manufacture*: Date of minimum durability**: 16. Attestations: 1. The products described above were manufactured at (an) establishment(s) that has/have been approved by, or otherwise determined to be in good regulatory standing with the competent authority in the exporting country and that 2. The product(s) (please tick the appropriate box(es). Where this is not possible the non-selected option may be deleted); • has/have been prepared, packed, held and transported prior to export under good hygienic practice and an effective food safety control system, implemented within the context of HACCP systems where appropriate and in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CAC/RCP 57-2004) • was/were produced in accordance with the public health requirements of.................................... (specify the country) 17. Certifying officer: Name: Official position: Date: Signature: Official stamp: The Model Export Certificate for Milk and Milk Products should be read in conjunction with the explanatory notes. *) If required by the importing country. **) When required by the importing country and expressed as provided in section 4.7.1 of the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Food (CODEX STAN 1-1995). -- 5 of 5 --