CAC/GL 72-2009 Page 1 of 18 GUIDELINES ON ANALYTICAL TERMINOLOGY (CAC/GL 72-2009) INTRODUCTION The Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling has agreed on Analytical Terminology for Codex Alimentarius and government use. A number of these terms were previously included in the Codex Procedural Manual. In most cases terms used in the Procedural Manual were adopted over time with an underlying hierarchy and can be traced verbatim to specific editions of ISO 3534, the GUM, the VIM, the IUPAC Orange Book or other international standards already adopted by Codex. Definitions of terms that have changed with newer editions of the international standards from which they were originally adopted have been updated preserving the original hierarchy found in the Procedural Manual. In cases where terms have been added in addition to those originally found in the procedural manual an effort has been made to preserve the conceptual continuity and relationship of the newer terms with extant ones. These terms, together with the terms which are included in specific International Protocols/Guidelines already adopted by Codex by reference are given below. ANALYTICAL TERMS The following analytical terms are defined below: Accuracy Analyte Applicability Bias Calibration Certified reference material Conventional quantity value Critical value Defining (Empirical) method of analysis Error Expanded measurement uncertainty Fitness for purpose HorRat Inter-laboratory study Laboratory performance (Proficiency) study Limit of detection Limit of quantification Linearity Material certification study Measurand Measurement method Measurement procedure Measurement uncertainty -- 1 of 18 -- CAC/GL 72-2009 Page 2 of 18 Method-performance study Metrological Traceability Outlier Precision Quality assurance Rational method of analysis Recovery/recovery factors Reference material Reference value Repeatability (Reproducibility) Repeatability conditions Repeatability (Reproducibility) limit Repeatability (Reproducibility) standard deviation Repeatability (Reproducibility relative standard deviation Reproducibility conditions Result Robustness (ruggedness) Selectivity Sensitivity Surrogate Systematic error Trueness True value Validated range Validated Test Method Validation Verification -- 2 of 18 -- CAC/GL 72-2009 Page 3 of 18 DEFINITIONS OF ANALYTICAL TERMS Accuracy: The closeness of agreement between a test result or measurement result and a reference value. Notes: The term “accuracy,” when applied to a set of test results or measurement results, involves a combination of random components and a common systematic error or bias component. When applied to a test method, the term accuracy refers to a combination of trueness and precision. Reference: ISO Standard 3534-2: Vocabulary and Symbols Part 2: Applied Statistics, ISO, Geneva, 2006 Analyte: The chemical substance sought or determined in a sample. Note: This definition does not apply to molecular biological analytical methods. Reference: Codex Guidelines on Good Laboratory Practice in Residue Analysis (CAC/GL 40-1993) Applicability: the analytes, matrices, and concentrations for which a method of analysis may be used satisfactorily. Note: In addition to a statement of the range of capability of satisfactory performance for each factor, the statement of applicability (scope) may also include warnings as to known interference by other analytes, or inapplicability to certain matrices and situations. Reference: Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual, 17th Edition, 2007 Bias: The difference between the expectation of the test result or measurement result and the true value. In practice conventional quantity value (VIM, 2007) can be substituted for true value. Notes: Bias is the total systematic error as contrasted to random error. There may be one or more systematic error components contributing to bias. A larger systematic difference from the accepted reference value is reflected by a larger bias value. The bias of a measuring instrument is normally estimated by averaging the error of indication over the appropriate number of repeated measurements. The error of indication is the: “indication of a measuring instrument minus a true value of the corresponding input quantity”. Expectation is the expected value of a random variable, e.g. assigned value or long term average {ISO 5725- 1} Reference: ISO Standard 3534-2: Vocabulary and Symbols Part 2: Applied Statistics, ISO, Geneva, 2006 Calibration: Operation that, under specified conditions, in a first step, establishes a relation between the values with measurement uncertainties provided by measurement standards and corresponding indications with associated measurement uncertainties and in a second step uses this information to establish a relation for obtaining a measurement result from an indication. Notes: A calibration may be expressed by a statement, calibration function, calibration diagram, calibration curve, or calibration table. In some cases it may consist of an additive or multiplicative correction of the indication with associated measurement uncertainty. Calibration should not be confused with adjustment of a measuring system often mistakenly called “self calibration,” or with verification of calibration. -- 3 of 18 -- CAC/GL 72-2009 Page 4 of 18 Often the first step alone in the above definition is perceived as being calibration. Reference: VIM, International Vocabulary of Metrology – Basic and general concepts and associated terms, 3rd edition, JCGM 200: 2008 Certified reference material (CRM): Reference material accompanied by documentation issued by an authoritative body and providing one or more specified property values with associated uncertainties and traceability, using valid procedures Notes: Documentation is given in the form of a “certificate” (see ISO guide 30:1992). Procedures for the production and certification of certified reference materials are given, e.g. in ISO Guide 34 and ISO Guide 35. In this definition, “uncertainty” covers both measurement uncertainty and uncertainty associated with the value of the nominal property, such as for identity and sequence. Traceability covers both metrological traceability of a value and traceability of a nominal property value. Specified values of certified reference materials require metrological traceability with associated measurement uncertainty {Accred. Qual. Assur., 2006} ISO/REMCO has an analogous definition {Accred. Qual. Assur., 2006} but uses the modifiers metrological and metrologically to refer to both quantity and nominal properties. Reference: VIM, International Vocabulary of Metrology – Basic and general concepts and associated terms, 3rd edition, JCGM 200: 2008 New definitions on reference materials, Accreditation and Quality Assurance, 10:576-578, 2006 Conventional quantity value: quantity value attributed by agreement to a quantity for a given purpose. Notes: The term “conventional true quantity value” is sometimes used for this concept, but its use is discouraged. Sometimes a conventional quantity value is an estimate of a true quantity value. A conventional quantity value is generally accepted as being associated with a suitably small measurement uncertainty, which might be zero. Reference: VIM, International Vocabulary of Metrology – Basic and general concepts and associated terms, 3rd edition, JCGM 200: 2008 Critical value (LC): The value of the net concentration or amount the exceeding of which leads, for a given error probability α, to the decision that the concentration or amount of the analyte in the analyzed material is larger than that in the blank material. It is defined as: Pr ( >LC | L=0) ≤ α Where is the estimated value, L is the expectation or true value and LC is the critical value. Notes: The definition of critical value is important for defining the Limit of Detection (LOD). The critical value Lc is estimated by LC = t1-ανso, Where t1-αν is Student's-t, based on ν degrees of freedom for a one-sided confidence interval of 1-α and so is the sample standard deviation. If L is normally distributed with known variance, i.e. ν = ∞ with the default α of 0.05, LC = 1.645so. -- 4 of 18 -- CAC/GL 72-2009 Page 5 of 18 A result falling below the LC triggering the decision “not detected” should not be construed as demonstrating analyte absence. Reporting such a result as “zero” or as < LOD is not recommended. The estimated value and its uncertainty should always be reported. References: ISO Standard 11843: Capability of Detection-1, ISO, Geneva, 1997 Nomenclature in evaluation of analytical methods, IUPAC, 1995 Defining (empirical/conventional) method of analysis: A method in which the quantity measured is defined by the result found on following the stated procedure. Notes: Empirical methods are used for purposes that cannot be covered by rational methods. Bias in empirical methods is conventionally zero. Reference: Harmonised guidelines for single-laboratory validation of methods of analysis, 2002 Error: Measured quantity value minus a reference quantity value. Note: The concept of measurement ‘error’ can be used both: when there is a single reference value to refer to, which occurs if a calibration is made by means of a measurement standard with a measured value having a negligible measurement uncertainty or if a conventional value is given, in which case the measurement error is not known and if a measurand is supposed to be represented by a unique true value or a set of true values of negligible range, in which case the measurement error is not known. Reference: VIM, International Vocabulary of Metrology – Basic and general concepts and associated terms, 3rd edition, JCGM 200: 2008 Expanded measurement uncertainty: product of a combined standard measurement uncertainty and a factor larger than the number one Notes: The factor depends upon the type of probability distribution of the output quantity in a measurement model and on the selected coverage probability. The term factor in this definition refers to a coverage factor. Expanded measurement uncertainty is also termed expanded uncertainty. Reference: VIM, International Vocabulary of Metrology – Basic and general concepts and associated terms, 3rd edition, JCGM 200: 2008 Fitness for purpose: Degree to which data produced by a measurement process enables a user to make technically and administratively correct decisions for a stated purpose. Reference: Eurachem Guide: The fitness for purpose of analytical methods: A laboratory guide to method validation and related topics, 1998 HorRat: The ratio of the reproducibility relative standard deviation to that calculated from the Horwitz equation, Predicted relative standard deviation (PRSD)R =2C-0.15: HorRat(R) = RSDR/PRSDR , HorRat(r) = RSDr/PRSDR -- 5 of 18 -- CAC/GL 72-2009 Page 6 of 18 oncentration expressed as a mass fraction (both numerator and denominator expressed in the its). between 0.5 and 2. (To check proper calculation of PRSDR, a C of 10-6 should give a e predicted relative standard deviation developed by Thompson 2000), 22% should be used. entrations in relation to fitness for s, stable materials under documented conditions, the results of which are compiled ngle document. pl. Chem., 66, 1903- requires a minimum of eight laboratories for method-performance studies. known or assigned reference value, usually with the objective of improving laboratory performance. proved or equivalent methods. In such situations, a method-performance study, provided that the test samples cover the tion with independent facilities, instruments, and calibration materials, are fferent laboratories. Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual, 17 Edition, 2007 Where C is c same un Notes: The HorRat is indicative of method performance for a large majority of methods in chemistry. Normal values lie PRSDR of 16 %.) If applied to within-laboratory studies, the normal range of HorRat(r) is 0.3-1.3. For concentrations less than 0.12 mg/kg th (The Analyst, References: A simple method for evaluating data from an inter-laboratory study, J AOAC, 81(6):1257-1265, 1998 Recent trends in inter-laboratory precision at ppb and sub-ppb conc purpose criteria in proficiency testing, The Analyst, 125:385-386, 2000 Inter-laboratory study: A study in which several laboratories measure a quantity in one or more “identical” portions of homogeneou into a si Notes: The larger the number of participating laboratories, the greater the confidence that can be placed in the resulting estimates of the statistical parameters. The IUPAC-1987 protocol (Pure & Ap 1911(1994)) Reference: th Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual, 17 Edition, 2007 Laboratory-performance (proficiency) study: An inter-laboratory study that consists of one or more measurements by a group of laboratories on one or more homogeneous, stable, test samples by the method selected or used by each laboratory. The reported results are compared with those from other laboratories or with the Notes: Laboratory-performance studies can be used to support laboratory accreditation of laboratories or to audit performance. If a study is conducted by an organization with some type of management control over the participating laboratories: organizational, accreditation, regulatory or contractual, the method may be specified or the selection may be limited to a list of ap single test sample is insufficient to judge performance. A laboratory-performance study may be used to select a method of analysis that will be used in a method- performance study. If all laboratories, or a sufficiently large subgroup, of laboratories, use the same method, the study may also be interpreted as a range of concentration of the analyte. Laboratories of a single organiza treated as di Reference: th -- 6 of 18 -- CAC/GL 72-2009 Page 7 of 18 Limit of Detection (LOD): The true net concentration or amount of the analyte in the material to be analyzed which will lead, with probability (1-β), to the conclusion that the concentration or amount of the analyte in the analyzed material is larger than that in the blank material. It is defined as: Pr ( ≤LC | L=LOD) = β Where is the estimated value, L is the expectation or true value and LC is the critical value. Notes: The limit of detection LOD is estimated by, LOD ≈ 2t1-ανσo [where α = β], Where t1-αν is Student's-t, based on ν degrees of freedom for a one-sided confidence interval of 1-α and σo is the standard deviation of the true value (expectation). LOD = 3.29 σo, when the uncertainty in the mean (expected) value of the blank is negligible, α = β = 0.05 and L is normally distributed with known constant variance. However, LOD is not defined simply as a fixed coefficient (e.g. 3, 6, etc.) times the standard deviation of a pure solution background. To do so can be extremely misleading. The correct estimation of LOD must take into account degrees of freedom, α and β, and the distribution of L as influe