CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR EDIBLE CASSAVA FLOUR CXS 176-1995 CXS 176-1995 ADOPTED 1995 AMENDED 2024 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 8 -- History of the standard 2026 Correction The year of adoption was corrected to the date of adoption for the international standard: 1995. This publication was redesigned and published in 2025. 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, amendments were made in Annex I to align with the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). 2023 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2023, amendments were made in the annex. Amendments and revisions made prior to 2023: Amended in 2013 and 2019. Adopted in 1995. -- 2 of 8 -- 1 STANDARD FOR EDIBLE CASSAVA FLOUR (CXS 176-1995) 1 Scope This standard applies to cassava flour intended for direct human consumption which is obtained from the processing of edible cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz). 2 Description 2.1 Definition of the product Edible cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) flour is the product prepared from dried cassava chips or paste by a pounding, grinding or milling process, followed by sifting to separate the fibre from the flour. In the case of edible cassava flour prepared from bitter cassava (Manihot utilissima Pohl), detoxification is carried out by soaking the tubers in water for a few days, before they undergo drying in the form of whole, pounded tuber (paste) or in small pieces. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Quality factors – general a) Edible cassava flour shall be safe and suitable for human consumption. b) Edible cassava flour shall be free from abnormal flavours, odours, and living insects. c) Edible cassava flour shall be free from filth (impurities of animal origin, including dead insects) in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. 3.2 Quality factors – specific 3.2.1 Moisture content 13 percent m/m max. Lower moisture limits should be required for certain destinations in relation to the climate, duration of transport and storage. 4 Contaminants The product covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995).¹ 4.1 Pesticide residues The product covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC). 5 Hygiene It is recommended that the product covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),² and other codes of practice recommended by the CAC which are relevant to this product. -- 3 of 8 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD To the extent possible in good manufacturing practice, the product shall be free from objectionable matter. When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination, the product: • shall be free from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health; • shall be free from parasites which may represent a hazard to health; and • shall not contain any substance originating from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. 6 Packaging Cassava flour shall be packaged in containers which will safeguard the hygienic, nutritional, technological and organoleptic qualities of the product. The containers, including packaging material, shall be made of substances which are safe and suitable for their intended use. They should not impart any toxic substance or undesirable odour or flavour to the product. When the product is packaged in sacks, these must be clean, sturdy and strongly sewn or sealed. 7 Labelling In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),³ the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 Name of the product The name of the product to be shown on the label shall be “edible cassava flour”. 7.2 Labelling of non-retail containers Information for nonretail containers shall either be given on the container or in accompanying documents, except that the name of the product, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer shall appear on the container. However, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer may be replaced by an identification mark, provided that such a mark is clearly identifiable with the accompanying documents. -- 4 of 8 -- 3 STANDARD FOR EDIBLE CASSAVA FLOUR (CXS 176-1995) 8 Methods of analysis and sampling For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)⁴ relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. ANNEX I In those instances where more than one factor limit and/or method of analysis is given, we strongly recommend that users specify the appropriate limit and method of analysis. Table 1 Factor/description Limit Method of analysis Crude fibre Max: 2.0% Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Ash Max: 3.0% Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Food additives Conform with legislation of the country in which the product is sold None defined Particle size Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” • fine flour Min: 90% shall pass through a 0.60 mm sieve • coarse flour Min: 90% shall pass through a 1.20 mm sieve -- 5 of 8 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD Referenced texts 1 General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995). 2 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 3 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 4 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). -- 6 of 8 -- -- 7 of 8 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2025. Standard for edible cassava flour . Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 176-199. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao. org/handle/20.500.14283/cd8972en Some rights reserved. This work is made axvailable under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 8 of 8 --