CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR CANNED STONE FRUITS CXS 242-2003 CXS 242-2003 ADOPTED 2003 AMENDED 2025 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 14 -- History of the standard 2025 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-eighth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2025, amendments were made in Section 4: “Food additives” to align with the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995). This publication was redesigned and published in 2025. 2022 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-fifth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022, amendments were made in Section 8.2: “Labelling of non-retail containers”. Amendments made prior to 2022: Amended in 2017. Adopted in 2003. -- 2 of 14 -- 1 STANDARD FOR CANNED STONE FRUITS (CXS 242-2003) 1 Scope This standard applies to canned stone fruits of the genus Prunus,i as defined in Section 2: “Description”, and offered for direct consumption, including for catering purposes or for repacking if required. It does not apply to the product when indicated as being intended for further processing. 2 Description 2.1 Product definition Canned stone fruits is the product: a) prepared from fresh or frozen or previously canned, mature stone fruits of commercial canning varieties of the genus Prunus, stemmed, pitted or unpitted, and conforming to the characteristics of the stone fruits suitable for human consumption; b) packed with or without a suitable liquid packing medium, sugars and/or other carbohydrate sweeteners such as honey, and other permitted ingredients as indicated in Section 3.1.3: “Other permitted ingredients”; and c) processed by heat, in an appropriate manner, before or after being hermetically sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage. 2.2 Species The following species may be used: 2.2.1 Apricot – Prunus armeniaca L. 2.2.2 Peach – Prunus persica L. 2.2.3 Plum a) Prunus cerasifera Ehrb. (cherry plum); b) Prunus domestica L. (plum); c) Prunus insititia L. (mirabelle or damson); and d) Prunus italica L. (greengage). 2.2.4 Cherry a) Prunus avium L. (sweet cherry including Bigarreaux); and b) Prunus cerasus L., var. austera L. (sour cherry including griottes). i Only applies to stone fruits of the genus Prunus. -- 3 of 14 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 2.3 Varietal type Distinct varietal types should be designated for peaches, plums and cherries. 2.3.1 Peach 2.3.1.1 Type by the ease of separation of pit: a) clingstone – where the pit adheres to the flesh; or b) freestone – where the pit separates readily from the flesh. 2.3.1.2 Type by colour: a) green – varietal types in which the predominant colour of the flesh of the ripe fruit ranges from pale green to green when fully ripe; b) red – varietal types in which the predominant colour of the flesh of the ripe fruit ranges from pale yellow to orange red and with variegated red colouring other than that associated with the pit cavity; c) white – varietal types in which the predominant colour of the flesh of the ripe fruit ranges from white to yellow-white; and d) yellow – varietal type in which the predominant colour of the flesh of the ripe fruit ranges from pale yellow to rich red orange. 2.3.2 Plum a) Cherry plums b) Greengages c) Mirabelles d) Purple plums e) Quetsches f) Red plums g) Yellow plums 2.3.3 Cherries a) Sour (Griottes) b) Sweet dark c) Sweet light (Bigarreaux) 2.4 Styles The following styles are defined: 2.4.1 Peaches shall be peeled 2.4.2 Whole: unpitted or pitted whole fruit. 2.4.3 Halves: pitted and cut into two approximately equal parts.ii 2.4.4 Quarters: pitted and cut into four approximately equal parts. ii For the confectionary industry, peaches and apricots should be cut along the natural suture from the stem to the apex. -- 4 of 14 -- 3 STANDARD FOR CANNED STONE FRUITS (CXS 242-2003) 2.4.5 Slices: pitted and cut into wedge shaped sectors. 2.4.6 Dices: pitted and cut into cube-like parts. 2.4.7 Pieces (or mixed pieces or irregular pieces): pitted and comprising irregular shapes and sizes. In addition, solid pack of apricots may be prepared using a combination of both peeled and unpeeled apricots in the same pack. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Composition 3.1.1 Basic ingredients Stone fruits as defined in Section 2: “Description” and liquid packing medium appropriate to the product. 3.1.2 Packing media In accordance with the Guidelines for packing media for canned fruits (CXG 51-2003).1 3.1.3 Other permitted ingredients a) spices b) vinegar 3.2 Quality criteria Canned stone fruits shall have normal flavour, odour and colour and shall possess a texture characteristic of the product. The product shall be substantially free from pits or pieces of pit if greater than 2 mm in dimension, except in the case that the product is unpitted. 3.2.1 Other quality criteria 3.2.1.1 Colour The colour of the product, except for that of artificially coloured canned plums or cherries should be normal for the varietal type of the fruit used. Canned stone fruit containing special ingredients should be considered to be of characteristic colour when there is no abnormal discolouration for the respective ingredient used. Portions of peaches which are obviously near or part of the pit cavity and which after canning may become slightly discoloured are considered to be normal characteristic colour. 3.2.1.2 Flavour The product should have a normal flavour or odour free from flavours and odours foreign to the product. The product with special ingredients should have a flavour characteristic of that imparted by the fruit canned and the other substances used. 3.2.1.3 Texture The canned fruit should be reasonably fleshy of uniform texture and may be variable in tenderness, but should neither be mushy nor excessively firm. 3.2.1.4 Uniformity of size The fruit should be reasonably uniform in size. -- 5 of 14 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3.2.1.5 Definition of defects Defects are defined as follows: a) blemishes: means surface discolouration and spots arising from physical, pathological, insect or other agents that definitely contrast with the overall colour and which may penetrate into the flesh. Examples include bruises, scabs and dark discolouration. b) crushed or broken: considered a defect only in whole or halved canned fruits in liquid media pack; means a unit which has been crushed to the extent that it has lost its normal shape (not due to ripeness) or has been severed into definite parts. Halves partially split from the edge to the pit cavity and whole apricots split along the suture are not considered broken. All portions that collectively equal the size of a full-size unit are considered one unit in applying the allowance herein. In the case of plums and cherries, blemishes should not seriously affect the appearance of the products. c) harmless extraneous material: means any vegetable substance (such as, but not limited to, a leaf or portion thereof, or a stem) that is harmless, and which tends to detract from the appearance of the product. d) peel: considered as a defect except in “unpeeled” styles; means peel that adheres to the fruit flesh or is found loose in the container. e) pit (or stone) material: considered a defect in all styles except whole; means whole pits and pieces that are hard and sharp. f) split (cherries and plums): any split that seriously affect the appearance of the product. g) trim: considered a defect only in whole and halved canned fruits in liquid media packs. The trimming must be excessive and includes serious gouges (whether due to physical trimming or other means) on the surface of the units which definitely detract from the appearance. 3.2.1.6 Defects and allowances The product should be substantially free from defects such as extraneous material, pit (stone) material, peel (in peeled styles only), blemished units, and broken units. Certain common defects should not be present in amounts greater than the following limitations: (a) Canned apricots Defects Maximum limit in drained weight Liquid media packs Solid pack i) Blemish and trim 30% by count 3 units per 500 g ii) Broken (whole, halves) 15% by count Not applicable iii) Total of the foregoing defects 35% by count Not applicable iv) Harmless extraneous material 2 pieces per 500 g 3 pieces per 500 g v) Peel (average in peeled styles only) No not more than 6 cm² aggregate area per 500 g Not more than 12 cm² aggregate area per 500 g vi) Pit or pit material (average) 1 pit or its equivalent* per 500 g 1 pit or its equivalent* per 500 g Note: * One pit for this allowance is: one whole pit; or one large piece; the equivalent of one-half pit or larger; or up to three small hard pieces, the total mass of which is smaller than one-half pit. -- 6 of 14 -- 5 STANDARD FOR CANNED STONE FRUITS (CXS 242-2003) (b) Canned peaches Defects Maximum limit in drained weight Liquid media packs Solid pack i) Blemish and trim 30% by count 3 units per 500 g ii) Broken (whole, halves, quarters) 5% by count Not applicable iii) Total of the foregoing defects 32% by count Not applicable iv) Peel (average) Not more than 15 cm2 aggregate area per kg Not more than 30 cm 2 aggregate area per kg v) Pit or pit material (average) 1 pit or its equivalent* per 5 kg 1 pit or its equivalent* per 5 kg * One pit for this allowance is: one whole pit; or one large piece; the equivalent of one-half pit or larger; or up to three small hard pieces, the total mass of which is smaller than one-half pit. (c) Canned plums/canned cherries Defects Maximum limit in drained weight i) Blemish 30% m/m ii) Broken (whole, halves) 25% m/m iii) Total of the foregoing defects 35% m/m iv) Extraneous plant material 1 piece per 200 g (based on averages) v) Loose pits (whole) 3 per 500 g (based on averages) vi) Pit or pieces of pits (whole, halves) 2 per 500 g (based on averages) -- 7 of 14 -- 6 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3.3 Classification of defectives A container that fails to meet one or more of the applicable quality requirements, as set out in sections 3.2.1.1 to 3.2.1.6 (except peel and pit material which are based on an average), should be considered as a defective. 3.4 Lot acceptance A lot should be considered as meeting the applicable quality requirements referred to in Section 3.3: “Classification of defectives” when: a) for those requirements which are not based on averages, the number of defectives, as defined in Section 3.3: “Classification of defectives”, does not exceed the acceptance number (c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an acceptable quality level (AQL) of 6.5; and b) the requirements, which are based on sample averages, are complied with. 4 Food additives 4.1 Acidifying agents INS No. Name of the food additive Maximum level i) 260 Acetic acid Limited by good manufacturing practices (GMP) ii) 270 Lactic acid iii) 296 Malic acid iv) 330 Citric acid v) 334 Tartaric acid 1 300 mg/kg 4.2 Antioxidants INS No. Name of the food additive Maximum level i) 300 L-Ascorbic acid Limited by GMP -- 8 of 14 -- 7 STANDARD FOR CANNED STONE FRUITS (CXS 242-2003) 4.3 Colours INS No. Name of the food additive Maximum level i) 127 Erythrosine (for sweet cherries only) 200 mg/kg of the final product ii) 129 Allura Red AC (for canned “red” or “purple” plums only) iii) 160b (ii) Annatto extracts, norbixin-based 30 mg/kg for the purpose of restoring colour lost during processing 4.4 Flavourings Natural and synthetic flavourings except those which reproduce the flavour of the respective stone fruit Limited by GMP 5 Contaminants The product covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995).2 The product covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 6 Hygiene It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969)3 and other relevant Codex texts such as codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. The products should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997). 4 7 Weights and measures 7.1 Fill of container 7.1.1 Minimum fill The container should be well filled with the product (including packing medium) which should occupy not less than 90 percent of the water capacity of the container. The water capacity of the container is the volume of distilled water at 20 °C which the sealed container will hold when completely filled. -- 9 of 14 -- 8 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 7.1.2 Classification of defectives A container that fails to meet the requirement for minimum fill (90 percent container capacity) of Section 7.1.1: “Minimum fill” should be considered as defective. 7.1.3 Lot acceptance A lot should be considered as meeting the requirement of Section 7.1.1: “Minimum fill” when the number of defectives, as defined in Section 7.1.2: “Classification of defectives”, does not exceed the acceptance number (c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5. 7.1.4 Minimum drained weight The drained weight of the product should be not less than the following percentages, calculated on the basis of the weight of distilled water at 20 °C which the sealed container will hold when completely filled.iii a) Canned apricots i) In heavily sweetened fruit juice(s) or nectar(s) “heavy” and “extra heavy” syrup 54% ii) In lightly sweetened fruit juice(s) or nectar(s) “light” and “extra light” syrup 55% iii) Solid pack 82% iv) Whole fruits 46% b) Canned peaches Clingstone type Freestone type i) In “heavy” and “extra heavy” syrup 57% 54% ii) In “light” and “extra light” syrup 59% 56% iii) Solid pack 84% 82% iv) Whole fruits 52% c) Canned plum i) Whole styles 50% ii) Halves styles 55% d) Canned cherries i) All varieties 53% iii For non-metallic rigid containers such as glass jars, the basis for the determination should be calculated on the weight of distilled water at 20 °C which the sealed container will hold when completely filled less 20 ml. -- 10 of 14 -- 9 STANDARD FOR CANNED STONE FRUITS (CXS 242-2003) The requirements for minimum drained weight should be deemed to be complied with when the average drained weight of all containers examined is not less than the minimum required, provided that there is no unreasonable shortage in individual containers. 8 Labelling The products covered by the provisions of this standard shall be labelled in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985).5 In addition, the following specific provisions apply: 8.1 Name of the product The name of the product shall be the name of t