STANDARD FOR PAPAYA CXS 183-1993 Adopted in 1993. Revised in 2001. Amended in 2005, 2011. -- 1 of 5 -- CXS 183-1993 2 1. DEFINITION OF PRODUCE This Standard applies to fruits of commercial varieties of papayas grown from Carica papaya L., of the Caricaceae family, to be supplied fresh to the consumer, after preparation and packaging. Papayas for industrial processing are excluded. 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY 2.1 Minimum Requirements In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, the papayas must be: - whole; - sound, produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded; - clean, practically free of any visible foreign matter; - practically free of damage caused by pests; - practically free of pests affecting the general appearance of the produce; - free of abnormal external moisture, excluding condensation following removal from cold storage; - free of any foreign smell and/or taste1; - firm; - fresh in appearance; - free of damage caused by low and/or high temperatures. The peduncle, if present, should not exceed a length of 1 cm. 2.1.1 The papayas must have reached an appropriate degree of development and ripeness account being taken of the characteristics of the variety and/or commercial type and the area in which they are grown. The development and condition of the papayas must be such as to enable them: - to withstand transport and handling; and - to arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 2.2 Classification Papayas are classified in three classes defined below: 2.2.1 “Extra” Class Papayas in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. They must be free of defects, with the exception of very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. 2.2.2 Class I Papayas in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: - slight defects in shape; - slight skin defects (i.e. mechanical bruising, sun spots and/or latex burns). The total area affected shall not exceed 10% of the total surface. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 1 This provision allows for smell caused by conservation agents used in compliance with corresponding regulations. -- 2 of 5 -- CXS 183-1993 3 2.2.3 Class II This class includes papayas which do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes, but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 2.1 above. The following defects, however, may be allowed, provided the papayas retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation: - defects in shape; - defects in colouring; - skin defects (i.e., mechanical bruising, sun spots and latex burns). The total area affected should not exceed 15% of the total surface; - slight marks caused by pests. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Size is determined by the weight of the fruit with a minimum weight of 200 g, in accordance with the following table: Size Code Weight (in grams) A 200 – 300 B 301 – 400 C 401 – 500 D 501 – 600 E 601 – 700 F 701 – 800 G 801 – 1100 H 1101 – 1500 I 1501 – 2000 J > 2001 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES Tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each package (or in each lot for produce presented in bulk) for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 Quality Tolerances 4.1.1 “Extra” Class Five percent by number or weight of papayas not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class I or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent by number or weight of papayas not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class II or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.3 Class II Ten percent by number or weight of papayas satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements, with the exception of produce affected by rotting or any other deterioration rendering it unfit for consumption. 4.2 Size Tolerances For all classes, 10% by number or weight of papayas corresponding to the size immediately above and/or below that indicated on the package, with a minimum of 190 g for those papayas packed in the smallest size range. -- 3 of 5 -- CXS 183-1993 4 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 Uniformity The contents of each package (or lot for produce presented in bulk) must be uniform and contain only papayas of the same origin, variety and/or commercial type, quality and size. For “Extra” Class, colour and ripeness should be uniform. The visible part of the contents of the package (or lot for produce presented in bulk) must be representative of the entire contents. 5.2 Packaging Papayas must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new2, clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. Papayas shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 44-1995). 5.2.1 Description of Containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of the papayas. Packages (or lot for produce presented in bulk) must be free of all foreign matter and smell. 6. MARKING OR LABELLING 6.1 Consumer Packages In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CXS 1-1985), the following specific provisions apply: 6.1.1 Nature of Produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the name of the produce and may be labelled as to name of the variety and/or commercial type. 6.2 Non-retail Containers Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. For produce transported in bulk, these particulars must appear on a document accompanying the goods. 6.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher. Identification code (optional)3. 6.2.2 Nature of Produce Name of the produce if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety and/or commercial type. 6.2.3 Origin of Produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional or local place name. 6.2.4 Commercial Identification - Class; - Size (size code or average weight in grams); - Number of units (optional); - Net weight (optional). 6.2.5 Official Inspection Mark (optional) 2 For the purposes of this Standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality. 3 The national legislation of a number of countries requires the explicit declaration of the name and address. However, in the case where a code mark is used, the reference “packer and/or dispatcher (or equivalent abbreviations)” has to be indicated in close connection with the code mark. -- 4 of 5 -- CXS 183-1993 5 7. CONTAMINANTS 7.1 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193-1995). 7.2 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 8. HYGIENE 8.1 It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this Standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969), Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 53-2003), and other relevant Codex texts such as Codes of Hygienic Practice and Codes of Practice. 8.2 The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria related to Foods (CXG 21-1997). -- 5 of 5 --