Title: Standard for fresh curry leaves Code/Reference (use for filename): CXS 366-2026 Series title: Codex Alimentarius Standard Adopted date: Adopted 2026 BACK COVER Citation: FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for fresh curry leaves. Codex Alimentarius Standard. No. CXS 366-2026. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. Copyright year 2026 -- 1 of 5 -- 1. Scope The purpose of the standard is to define the quality requirements for fresh curry leaves after preparation and packaging. When applied at stages following packaging, products may show in relation to the requirements of the standard: • a slight lack of freshness and turgidity; and/or • a slight deterioration due to their development and tendency to perish. The holder or seller of fresh curry leaves may not display such products or offer them for sale or deliver or market them in any manner other than in conformity with this standard. The holder or seller shall be responsible for observing such conformity. 2. Definition of produce This standard applies to commercial varieties of fresh curry leaves obtained from varieties (cultivars) of Murraya koenigii (L.) Sprengel of the Rutaceae family, to be supplied fresh to the consumer. It does not apply to other forms such as dehydrated, powdered or dried curry leaves. Fresh curry leaves for industrial processing are excluded. Fresh curry leaves may be: • attached to small branches and/or twigs which may be bundled; • individual leaves loose in containers; or • leaves prepackaged in retail containers or pouches. 3. Provisions concerning quality 3.1 Minimum requirements In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, fresh curry leaves must display the following characteristics, deviations from which shall be observed by the naked eye or corrected 20/20 vision when appropriate:i • fresh in appearance; • intact with stem or stalk attached; • free of abnormal external moisture excluding condensation following removal from cold storage; • properly drained, damp but not excessively wet if washed; • free of any foreign smell and/or taste; • sound; • produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded; • clean, free of visible foreign matter; and • free from pests and damage caused by pests.ii The development and condition of fresh curry leaves must be such as to enable them to: • withstand transportation and handling; and • arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 3.1.1 Minimum maturity requirements Fresh curry leaves must be sufficiently developed, pliable and not woody. i Loupe, binocular or other magnifying equipment should not be used when assessing defects. ii Provisions for pests and damage caused by pests apply without prejudice to the applicable plant protection rules applied by governments in line with the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC). -- 2 of 5 -- 3.2 Classification Fresh curry leaves may be classified in three classes as defined below. When unclassified, the provisions for class II requirements apply. 3.2.1 “Extra” class Fresh curry leaves in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. They must be free from defects, except for very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. 3.2.2 Class I Fresh curry leaves in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. 3.2.3 Class II This class includes fresh curry leaves that do not qualify for inclusion in higher classes but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 3.1: “Minimum requirements”. 4. Provisions concerning sizing There is no sizing requirement for fresh curry leaves. 5. Provisions concerning tolerances 5.1 Quality tolerances At all marketing stages, tolerances in respect of quality shall be allowed in each lot for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. Produce that fails conformity assessment may be allowed to be re-sorted and brought into conformity in accordance with the relevant provisions in the Guidelines for food import control systems (CXG 47-2003).1 5.1.1 “Extra” class Five percent (5%) by weight or count of fresh curry leaves not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of class I. 5.1.2 Class I Ten percent (10%) by weight or count of fresh curry leaves not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting chose of class II. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided they do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: • slightly damaged leaves, such as cracks, holes or tears (not exceeding 3 percent by weight); and • slight defects in colouring (not exceeding 5 percent by weight). 5.1.3 Class II Ten percent (10%) by weight or count of fresh curry leaves not satisfying the requirements of the class II. The following defects may be allowed, provided the fresh curry leaves retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation: • damaged leaves, such as cracks, bruises, holes or tears (not exceeding 5 percent by weight); • defects in colouring (not exceeding 5 percent by weight); • slight lack of freshness; • slight spots from physical damage (not exceeding 2 percent by weight); and • missing or loose stalks or stems (not exceeding 1 percent by weight). -- 3 of 5 -- 5.2 Size tolerances The difference in length of fresh curry leaves within a package shall not exceed 30 mm. 6. Provisions concerning presentation 6.1 Uniformity The contents of each package must be uniform and contain fresh curry leaves of the same origin, variety or commercial type, quality, colour and size. The visible part of the contents of the package must be representative of the entire contents. However, a mixture of fresh curry leaves of distinctly different varieties or commercial types may be packed together in a package, provided they are uniform in quality and, for each variety or commercial type concerned, in origin. 6.2 Packaging Fresh curry leaves must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be of food-grade quality, clean and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. Fresh curry leaves shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Code of practice for packaging and transport of fresh fruits and vegetables (CXC 44-1995).2 6.2.1 Description of containers Containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of fresh curry leaves. Packages must be free of all foreign matter and smell. 7. Provisions concerning marking or labelling 7.1 Consumer packages In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),3 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1.1 Name of the product Each package shall be labelled as “fresh curry leaves”. 7.1.2 Origin of produce The country of origin,iii and optionally the district where the fresh curry leaves were grown, or the national, regional or local place name, may be used. In the case of a mixture of distinctly different varieties or commercial types of fresh curry leaves of different origins, the indication of each country of origin shall appear next to the name of the varieties or commercial types concerned. 7.2 Non-retail containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021).4 In addition, the following specific requirements shall apply. Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside. iii The full or commonly used name should be indicated. -- 4 of 5 -- 7.2.1 Origin of produce The country of origin,iv and optionally, district where grown, or the national, regional or local place name, may be used. In the case of a mixture of distinctly different species and/or varieties of fresh dates of different origins, the indication of each country of origin shall appear next to the name of the species and/or variety concerned. 7.2.2 Commercial specifications • Class 8. Food additives No food additives are permitted in foods conforming to this standard. 9. Contaminants a) The produce covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995).5 b) The produce covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 10. Hygiene a) It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),6 the Code of hygienic practice for fresh fruits and vegetables (CXC 53-2003),7 and other relevant Codex texts. b) The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997).8 REFERENCED TEXTS 1 Guidelines for food import control systems (CXG 47-2003). 2 Code of practice for packaging and transport of fresh fruits and vegetables (CXC 44-1995). 3 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 4 General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021). 5 General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995). 6 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 7 Code of hygienic practice for fresh fruits and vegetables (CXC 53-2003). 8 Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997). iv The full or commonly used name should be indicated. -- 5 of 5 --