STANDARD FOR PASSION FRUIT CODEX STAN 316-2014 -- 1 of 5 -- CODEX STAN 316-2014 2 1. DEFINITION OF PRODUCE This Standard applies to commercial varieties of passion fruit from the species golden passion fruit/ sweet granadilla (Passiflora ligularis Juss), purple passion fruit (Passiflora edulis Sims forma edulis), yellow passion fruit (Passiflora edulis Sims forma flavicarpa) and their hybrids grown from the Passifloraceae family, to be supplied fresh to the consumer after preparation and packaging. Passion fruits for industrial processing are excluded. 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY 2.1 Minimum requirements In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, the passion fruits must be: - whole; - fresh in appearance; - firm; - sound; produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded; - clean, free of any visible foreign matter; - practically free of pests and damage caused by them affecting the general appearance of the produce; - free of abnormal external moisture, excluding condensation following removal from cold storage; - free of any foreign smell and/or taste; - the stem/stalk should be present. For golden passion fruits, the stalk shall be present to the first knot; - free of surface depressions- applicable to golden passion fruits; - free of cracking. The passion fruits must have reached an appropriate degree of development and ripeness1 in accordance with criteria proper to the variety and to the area in which they are grown. The development and condition of the passion fruits must be such as to enable them: - to withstand transport and handling; and - to arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 2.2 Classification Passion fruits are classified into three classes defined below: 2.2.1 “Extra” Class Passion fruits in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the variety. They must be free e of defects, with the exception of very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. 2.2.2 Class I Passion fruits in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the variety. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: - a slight defect in shape; - slight defects of the skin such as scratches, not exceeding more than 10% of the total surface area of the fruit; - slight defects in colouring. The defects must not, in any case, affect the flesh of the fruit. 1 The maturity of passion fruits can be gauged visually from its external colouring and confirmed by examining total soluble solid content, titratable acidity. -- 2 of 5 -- CODEX STAN 316-2014 3 2.2.3 Class II This class includes passion fruits which do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes, but satisfy the minim um requirements specified in Section 2.1 above. The following defects, however, may be allowed, provided the passion fruits retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation: - defects in shape including an extension in the zone of the stalk; - defects of the skin such as scratches or rough skin, not exceeding more than 20% of the total surface area of the fruit; - defects in colouring. The defects must not, in any case, affect the flesh of the fruit. 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Passion fruits may be sized by diameter, count or weight; or in accordance with pre-existing trading practices. When such is the case, the package must be labelled accordingly. (A) When sized by count, size is determined by the number of individual fruit per package. (B) When sized by diameter, size is determined by the maximum diameter of the equatorial section of each fruit. The following table is a guide and may be used on an optional basis. Size Code Diameter range (mm) A > 78 B > 67 - 78 C > 56 - 67 D ≤ 56* * The minimum diameter for golden passion fruit is 56 mm (C) When sized by weight, size is determined based on the individual weight of each fruit. The following table is a guide and may be used on an optional basis. Size Code Weight range (g) A > 139 B > 128 -139 C > 122 - 128 D > 106 -122 E > 83 -106 F ≥ 74 -83 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES Tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each package for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 Quality Tolerances 4.1.1 “Extra” Class Five percent by number or weight of passion fruits not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class I or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. -- 3 of 5 -- CODEX STAN 316-2014 4 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent by number or weight of passion fruits not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class II or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.3 Class II Ten percent by number or weight of passion fruits satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements, with the exception of produce affected by rotting or any other deterioration rendering it unfit for consumption. 4.2 Size tolerances For all classes or forms of presentation, 10% by number or weight of passion fruits corresponding to the size immediately above and/or below that indicated on the package. 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 Uniformity The contents of each package must be uniform and contain only passion fruits of the same origin, variety, quality, colour and size. The visible part of the contents of the package must be representative of the entire contents. 5.2 Packaging Passion fruits must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new2, clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. Passion fruits shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 44-1995). 5.2.1 Description of containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of the passion fruits. Packages must be free of all foreign matter and smell. 6. MARKING OR LABELLING 6.1 Consumer packages In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CODEX STAN 1-1985), the following specific provisions apply: 6.1.1 Nature of Produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the name of the produce: golden passion fruit /sweet granadilla, purple passion fruit, yellow passion fruit and may be labelled as to name of the variety. 6.2 Non-retail containers Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. 6.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher. Identification code (optional)3. 6.2.2 Nature of Produce Name of the produce, golden passion fruit /sweet granadilla, purple passion fruit, yellow passion fruit if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety (optional). 6.2.3 Origin of Produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional or local place name. 2 For the purposes of this Standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality 3 The national legislation of a number of countries requires the explicit declaration of the name and address. However, in the case where a code mark is used, the reference “packer and/or dispatcher (or equivalent abbreviations)” has to be indicated in close connection with the code mark. -- 4 of 5 -- CODEX STAN 316-2014 5 6.2.4 Commercial Identification - Class; - Size expressed in accordance with any one of the following methods:  Count,  Size code and range,  Size range. - Net weight (optional). 6.2.5 Official Inspection Mark (optional) 7. CONTAMINANTS The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CODEX STAN 193-1995). The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 8. HYGIENE It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this Standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 53-2003), and other relevant Codex texts such as codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria related to Foods (CAC/GL 21-1997). -- 5 of 5 --