CODEX STAN 184 Page 1 of 4 Amended 2005. STANDARD FOR MANGOES (CODEX STAN 184-1993) 1. DEFINITION OF PRODUCE This Standard applies to commercial varieties of mangoes grown from Mangifera indica L., of the Anacardiaceae family, to be supplied fresh to the consumer, after preparation and packaging. Mangoes for industrial processing are excluded. 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY 2.1 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, the mangoes must be: - whole; - sound, produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded; - clean, practically free of any visible foreign matter; - practically free of damage caused by pests; - free of abnormal external moisture, excluding condensation following removal from cold storage; - free of any foreign smell and/or taste; - firm; - fresh in appearance; - free of damage caused by low temperatures; - free of black necrotic stains or trails; - free of marked bruising; - sufficiently developed and display satisfactory ripeness. When a peduncle is present, it shall be no longer than 1.0 cm. 2.1.1 The development and condition of the mangoes must be such as to enable them: - to ensure a continuation of the maturation process until they reach the appropriate degree of maturity corresponding to the varietal characteristics; - to withstand transport and handling; and - to arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. In relation to the evolution of maturing, the colour may vary according to variety. 2.2 CLASSIFICATION Mangoes are classified in three classes defined below: 2.2.1 “Extra” Class Mangoes in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the variety. They must be free of defects, with the exception of very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. -- 1 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 184 Page 2 of 4 2.2.2 Class I Mangoes in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the variety. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: - slight defects in shape; - slight skin defects due to rubbing or sunburn, suberized stains due to resin exudation (elongated trails included) and healed bruises not exceeding 3, 4, 5 cm² for size groups A, B, C respectively. 2.2.3 Class II This class includes mangoes which do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes, but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 2.1 above. The following defects, however, may be allowed, provided the mangoes retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation: - defects in shape; - skin defects due to rubbing or sunburn, suberized stains due to resin exudation (elongated trails included) and healed bruises not exceeding 5, 6, 7 cm² for size groups A, B, C respectively. In Classes I and II, scattered suberized rusty lenticels, as well as yellowing of green varieties due to exposure to direct sunlight, not exceeding 40% of the surface and not showing any signs of necrosis are allowed. 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Size is determined by the weight of the fruit, in accordance with the following table: Size Code Weight (in grams) A 200 - 350 B 351 - 550 C 551 - 800 The maximum permissible difference between fruit in the same package belonging to one of the above mentioned size groups shall be 75, 100 and 125 g respectively. The minimum weight of mangoes must not be less than 200 g. 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES Tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each package for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 QUALITY TOLERANCES 4.1.1 “Extra” Class Five percent by number or weight of mangoes not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class I or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent by number or weight of mangoes not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class II or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. -- 2 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 184 Page 3 of 4 4.1.3 Class II Ten percent by number or weight of mangoes satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements, with the exception of produce affected by rotting, marked bruising or any other deterioration rendering it unfit for consumption. 4.2 SIZE TOLERANCES For all classes, 10% by number or weight of mangoes in each package are permitted to be outside (above or below) the group size range by 50% of the maximum permissible difference for the group. In the smallest size range, mangoes must not be less than 180 g and for those in the largest size range a maximum of 925 g applies, as follows: Size Code Normal Size Range Permissible Size Range ( < 10% of fruit/package exceeding the normal size range ) Max. permissible difference between fruit in each package A 200 – 350 180 – 425 112.5 B 351 – 550 251 – 650 150 C 551 – 800 426 – 925 187.5 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 UNIFORMITY The contents of each package must be uniform and contain only mangoes of the same origin, variety, quality and size. The visible part of the contents of the package must be representative of the entire 5.2 PACKAGING Mangoes must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new1, clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. Mangoes shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Recommended International Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 44-1995). 5.2.1 Description of Containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of the mangoes. Packages (or lot for produce presented in bulk) must be free of all foreign matter and smell. 6. MARKING OR LABELLING 6.1 CONSUMER PACKAGES In addition to the requirements of the Codex General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CODEX STAN 1-1985), the following specific provisions apply: 6.1.1 Nature of Produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the name of the produce and may be labelled as to name of the variety. 1 For the purposes of this Standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality. -- 3 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 184 Page 4 of 4 6.2 NON-RETAIL CONTAINERS Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. For produce transported in bulk these particulars must appear on a document accompanying the goods. 6.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher. Identification code (optional)2. 6.2.2 Nature of Produce Name of the produce if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety or commercial type (optional). 6.2.3 Origin of Produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional or local place name. 6.2.4 Commercial Identification - Class; - Size (size code or weight range in grams); - Number of units (optional); - Net weight (optional). 6.2.5 Official Inspection Mark (optional) 7. CONTAMINANTS 7.1 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the Codex General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CODEX STAN 193-1995). 7.2 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 8. HYGIENE 8.1 It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this Standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the Recommended International Code of Practice – General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 53-2003), and other relevant Codex texts such as Codes of Hygienic Practice and Codes of Practice. 8.2 The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods (CAC/GL 21-1997). 2 The national legislation of a number of countries requires the explicit declaration of the name and address. However, in the case where a code mark is used, the reference “packer and/or dispatcher (or equivalent abbreviations)” has to be indicated in close connection with the code mark. -- 4 of 4 --