CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR PEANUTS CXS 200-1995 CXS 200-1995 ADOPTED 1995 AMENDED 2026 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 8 -- History of the standard 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, the Annex was amended by replacing the method of analysis for the determination of kernel defects – damaged kernels with a reference to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” which in turn references the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). This publication was reformatted and published in 2026. Amendments made prior to 2026: Amended in 2019. -- 2 of 8 -- 1 STANDARD FOR PEANUTS (CXS 200-1995) 1 Scope This standard applies to peanuts as defined in Section 2: “Description” intended for processing for direct human consumption. 2 Description 2.1 Definition of the product Peanuts, either in the pod or in the form of kernels, are obtained from varieties of the species Arachis hypogaea L. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Quality factors – general a) Peanuts shall be safe and suitable for processing for human consumption. b) Peanuts shall be free from abnormal flavours, odours, living insects and mites. 3.2 Quality factors – specific 3.2.1 Moisture content Maximum level Peanuts in-pod 10% Peanut kernels 9% Lower moisture limits should be required for certain destinations in relation to the climate, duration of transport, and storage. 3.2.2 Mouldy, rancid or decayed kernels 0.2% m/m max • Decayed kernels are defined as those showing visibly significant decomposition. • Mouldy kernels are defined as kernels with mould filaments visible to the naked eye. • Rancid kernels are defined as those which have undergone oxidation of lipids (should not exceed 5 meq active oxygen/kg) or the production of free fatty acids (should not exceed 1.0%) resulting in the production of disagreeable flavours. 3.2.3 Organic and inorganic extraneous matter This is defined as organic or inorganic components other than peanuts and includes stones, dust, seeds, stems, etc. 3.2.3.1 Filth Impurities of animal origin (including dead insects), 0.1% m/m max. -- 3 of 8 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3.2.3.2 Other organic and inorganic extraneous matter Peanuts in-pod 0.5% m/m max Peanut kernels 0.5% m/m max 4 Contaminantsi 4.1 Heavy metals The products covered by the provisions of this standard shall be free from heavy metals in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. 4.2 Pesticide residues Peanuts shall comply with those maximum residue limits established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission for this commodity. 5 Hygiene a) It is recommended that the product covered by the provisions of this standard should be prepared in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),1 and other codes of practice recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission which are relevant to this product. b) To the extent possible in good manufacturing practice, the product shall be free from objectionable matter. c) When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination, the product: • shall be free from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health; • shall be free from parasites which may represent a hazard to health; and • shall not contain any substance originating from microorganisms, including fungi, in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. 6 Packaging a) Peanuts shall be packaged in a manner which will safeguard the hygienic, nutritional, technological, and organoleptic qualities of the product. Packaging will be sound, clean, dry, and free from insect infestation or fungal contamination. b) Packing material shall be made of substances which are safe and suitable for their intended use, including new clean jute bags, tinplate containers, plastic or paper boxes or bags. They should not impart any toxic substance or undesirable odour or flavour to the product. c) When the product is packaged in sacks, these must be clean, sturdy, and strongly sewn or sealed. i A proposed draft guideline level for total aflatoxin in peanuts intended for further processing is under elaboration. -- 4 of 8 -- 3 STANDARD FOR PEANUTS (CXS 200-1995) 7 Labelling In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),2 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 Name of the product The name of the product to be shown on the label shall be “peanuts” or “peanuts in-pod”, and type of peanuts. 7.2 Labelling of non-retail containers Information for non-retail containers shall be given either on the container or in accompanying documents, except that the name of the product, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer shall appear on the container. However, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer may be replaced by an identification mark, provided that such a mark is clearly identifiable with the accompanying documents. 8 Methods of analysis and sampling For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)3 relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. -- 5 of 8 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD ANNEX In those instances where more than one factor limit and/or method of analysis is given, it is strongly recommended that users specify the appropriate limit and method of analysis. Factor/description Limit Method of analysis 1. In-pod defects 1.1 Empty pods: pods containing no kernels. 3% m/m To be determined 1.2 Damaged pods: include: a) shrivelled pods (pods which are imperfectly developed and shrunken); or 10% m/m To be determined b) pods having cracks or broken areas which cause conspicuous openings or which seriously weaken a large portion of the pod, especially if the kernel inside the pod is easily visible without any pressure forced upon the edges of the crack. 1.3 Discoloured pods: pods having dark discolouration caused by mildew, staining, or other means affecting 50% or more of the pod surface. 2% m/m To be determined 2. Kernel defects 2.1 Damaged kernels include: a) those affected by freezing injury causing hard, translucent or discoloured flesh; 1% m/m Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” b) shrivelled kernels which are imperfectly developed and shrunken; and/or 5% m/m c) those damaged by insects, worm cuts; 2% m/m d) mechanical damage; 2%m/m e) germinated kernels. 2% m/m 2.2 Discoloured kernels: kernels are not damaged but are affected by one or more of the following: a) flesh (cotyledon) discolouration which is darker than a light-yellow colour or consists of more than a slight yellow pitting of the flesh; and/or 3% m/m To be determined b) skin discolouration which is dark brown, dark grey, dark blue, or black, and covers more than 25% of the kernel. 2.3 Broken and split kernels: broken kernels are those from which more than a quarter has been broken off. Split kernels have been split into halves. 3% m/m To be determined 3. Peanuts other than the designated type. 5% m/m To be determined -- 6 of 8 -- 5 STANDARD FOR PEANUTS (CXS 200-1995) REFERENCED TEXTS 1 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 2 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 3 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). -- 7 of 8 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for peanuts. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 200-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/ce0346en Some rights reserved. This work is made available under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 8 of 8 --