CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S GENERAL STANDARD FOR FRUIT JUICES AND NECTARS CXS 247-2005 CXS 247-2005 ADOPTED 2005 AMENDED 2026 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 28 -- History of the standard 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, Section 9: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Table 2: “Methods of analysis and sampling” was amended by deleting the methods of analysis that were revoked. This publication was reformatted and published in 2026. 2025 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-eighth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2025, amendments were made in Section 9: “Methods of analysis and sampling” to align with the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). 2024 Amendment The Forty-seventhSession of the Codex Alimentarius Commission agreed to amend the General standard for fruit juices and nectars (CXS 247-2005) by inserting a note in the annex under the entry for “Vitis vinifera L. or hybrids thereof, Vitis labrusca or hybrids thereof,” Grape, under the value of 16.0 for the minimum Brix level for reconstituted fruit juice and fruit purée. 2022 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-fifth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022, amendments were made in Section 8.2: “Labelling of non-retail containers”. Adopted in 2005. -- 2 of 28 -- 1 GENERAL STANDARD FOR FRUIT JUICES AND NECTARS (CXS 247-2005) 1 Scope This standard applies to all products as defined in Section 2.1: “Product definition”.i 2 Description 2.1 Product definition 2.1.1 Fruit juice Fruit juice is the unfermented but fermentable liquid obtained from the edible part of sound, appropriately mature and fresh fruit or of fruit maintained in sound condition by suitable means including post-harvest surface treatments applied in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC). Some juices may be processed with pips, seeds and peel, which are not usually incorporated in the juice, but some parts or components of pips, seeds and peel, which cannot be removed by good manufacturing practices (GMP) will be acceptable. The juice is prepared by suitable processes, which maintain the essential physical, chemical, organoleptic and nutritional characteristics of the juices of the fruit from which it comes. The juice may be cloudy or clear and may have restored aromatic substances and volatile flavour components,ii all of which must be obtained by suitable physical means, and all of which must be recovered from the same kind of fruit. Pulp and cells obtained by suitable physical means from the same kind of fruit may be added.iii A single juice is obtained from one kind of fruit. A mixed juice is obtained by blending two or more juices or juices and purées, from different kinds of fruit. Fruit juice is obtained as follows: • fruit juice directly expressed by mechanical extraction processes; and • fruit juice from concentrate by reconstituting concentrated fruit juice defined in Section 2.1.2: “Concentrated fruit juice” with potable water that meets the criteria described in Section 3.1.1(c): “Basic ingredients”. i This standard supersedes individual standards for fruit juices and related products, as indicated below: Fruit juices preserved exclusively by physical means: Orange juice (CXS 45-1981), Grapefruit juice (CXS 46-1981), Lemon juice (CXS 47-1981), Apple juice (CXS 48-1981), Tomato juice (CXS 49-1981), Grape juice (CXS 82-1981), Pineapple juice (CXS 85-1981), Blackcurrant juice (CXS 120-1981) and General standard for fruit juices not covered by individual standards (CXS 164-1989). Concentrated fruit juices preserved exclusively by physical means: Concentrated apple juice (CXS 63-1981), Concentrated orange juice (CXS 64-1981), Concentrated grape juice (CXS 83-1981), Concentrated labrusca type grape juice, sweetened (CXS 84-1981), Concentrated blackcurrant juice (CXS 121-1981) and Concentrated pineapple juice (CXS 138-1983).Concentrated fruit juices with preservatives for manufacturing: Concentrated pineapple juice (CXS 139-1983). Fruit nectars preserved exclusively by physical means: Apricot, peach and pear nectars (CXS 44-1981), Guava nectar (CXS 148-1985), Non-pulpy blackcurrant nectar (CXS 101-1981), Pulpy nectars of certain small fruits (CXS 122-1981), Nectars of certain small fruits (CXS 122-1981), Nectars of certain citrus fruits (CXS 134-1981), General standard for fruit nectars not covered by individual standards (CXS 161-1989) and Liquid pulpy mango products (CXS 149-1985).Guidelines: Guidelines for mixed fruit juices (CXG 11-1991) and Guidelines for mixed fruit nectars (CXG 12-1991). ii Introduction of aromas and flavours are allowed to restore the level of these components up to the normal level attained in the same kind of fruit. iii For citrus fruits, pulp or cells are the juice sacs obtained from the endocarp. -- 3 of 28 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 2.1.2 Concentrated fruit juice Concentrated fruit juice is the product that complies with the definition given in Section 2.1.1: “Fruit juice”, except water has been physically removed in an amount sufficient to increase the Brix level to a value at least 50 percent greater than the Brix value established for reconstituted juice from the same fruit, as indicated in the annex. In the production of juice that is to be concentrated, suitable processes are used and may be combined with simultaneous diffusion of the pulp cells or fruit pulp by water, provided that the water- extracted soluble fruit solids are added in line to the primary juice, before the concentration procedure. Fruit juice concentrates may have restorediv aromatic substances and volatile flavour components, all of which must be obtained by suitable physical means, and all of which must be recovered from the same kind of fruit. Pulp and cellsv obtained by suitable physical means from the same kind of fruit may be added. 2.1.3 Water-extracted fruit juice Water-extracted fruit juice is the product obtained by diffusion with water of: • pulpy whole fruit whose juice cannot be extracted by any physical means; or • dehydrated whole fruit. Such products may be concentrated and reconstituted. The solids content of the finished product shall meet the minimum Brix level for reconstituted juice specified in the annex. 2.1.4 Fruit purée for use in the manufacture of fruit juices and nectars Fruit purée for use in the manufacture of fruit juices and nectars is the unfermented but fermentable product obtained by suitable processes e.g. by sieving, grinding, milling the edible part of the whole or peeled fruit without removing the juice. The fruit must be sound, appropriately mature, and fresh or preserved by physical means or by treatment(s) applied in accordance with the applicable provisions of the CAC. Fruit purée may have restored aromatic substances and volatile flavour components,vi all of which must be obtained by suitable physical means, and all of which must be recovered from the same kind of fruit. Pulp and cellsvii obtained by suitable physical means from the same kind of fruit may be added. 2.1.5 Concentrated fruit purée for use in the manufacture of fruit juices and nectars Concentrated fruit purée for use in the manufacture of fruit juices and nectars is obtained by the physical removal of water from the fruit purée in an amount sufficient to increase the Brix level to a value at least 50 percent greater than the Brix value established for reconstituted juice from the same fruit, as indicated in Annex I. Concentrated fruit purée may have restored aromatic substances and volatile flavour components,viii all of which must be obtained by suitable physical means, and all of which must be recovered from the same kind of fruit. iv Introduction of aromas and flavours are allowed to restore the level of these components up to the normal level attained in the same kind of fruit. v For citrus fruits, pulp or cells are the juice sacs obtained from the endocarp. vi Introduction of aromas and flavours are allowed to restore the level of these components up to the normal level attained in the same kind of fruit. vii For citrus fruits, pulp or cells are the juice sacs obtained from the endocarp. viii Introduction of aromas and flavours are allowed to restore the level of these components up to the normal level attained in the same kind of fruit. -- 4 of 28 -- 3 GENERAL STANDARD FOR FRUIT JUICES AND NECTARS (CXS 247-2005) 2.1.6 Fruit nectar Fruit nectar is the unfermented but fermentable product obtained by adding water with or without the addition of sugars as defined in Section 3.1.2(a): “Other permitted ingredients”, honey and/or syrups as described in Section 3.1.2(b): “Other permitted ingredients”, and/or food additive sweeteners as listed in the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995)¹ to products defined in Sections 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.3, 2.1.4 and 2.1.5 or to a mixture of those products. Aromatic substances, volatile flavour components, pulp and cells,ix all of which must be recovered from the same kind of fruit and be obtained by suitable physical means, may be added. That product moreover must meet the requirements defined for fruit nectars in Annex I. A mixed fruit nectar is obtained from two or more different kinds of fruit. 2.2 Species The species indicated as the botanical name in the annex shall be used in the preparation of fruit juices, fruit purées and fruit nectars bearing the product name for the applicable fruit. For fruit species not included in Annex I, the correct botanical or common name shall apply. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Composition 3.1.1 Basic ingredients a) For directly expressed fruit juices, the Brix level shall be the Brix as expressed from the fruit, and the soluble solids content of the single strength juice shall not be modified, except by blendings with the juice of the same kind of fruit. b) The preparation of fruit juice that requires reconstitution of concentrated juices must be in accordance with the minimum Brix level established in the annex, exclusive of the solids of any added optional ingredients and additives. If there is no Brix level specified in the table, minimum Brix shall be calculated on the basis of the soluble solids content of the single strength juice used to produce such concentrated juice. c) For reconstituted juice and nectar, the potable water used in reconstitution shall, at a minimum, meet the latest edition of the World Health Organization’s Guidelines for drinking-water quality (volumes 1 and 2).2 ix For citrus fruits, pulp or cells are the juice sacs obtained from the endocarp. -- 5 of 28 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3.1.2 Other permitted ingredients Except as otherwise provided, the following shall be subject to ingredient labelling requirements: a) Sugars with less than 2 percent moisture as defined in the Standard for sugars (CXS 212-1999):3 sucrose,x dextrose anhydrous, glucose,xi fructose, may be added to all products defined in Section 2.1: “Product definition”. The addition of ingredients listed in Section 3.1.2(a) and Section 3.1.2(b) applies only to products intended for sale to the consumer or for catering purposes. b) Syrups (as defined in the Standard for sugars (CXS 212-1999)), liquid sucrose, invert sugar solution, invert sugar syrup, fructose syrup, liquid cane sugar, isoglucose and high fructose syrup may be added only to fruit juice from concentrate, as defined in Section 2.1.2: “Concentrated fruit juice”, concentrated fruit purée as defined in Section 2.1.5: “Concentrated fruit purée for use in the manufacture of fruit juices and nectars”, and fruit nectars as defined in Section 2.1.6: “Fruit nectar”. Honey and/or sugars derived from fruits may be added only to fruit nectars as defined in Section 2.1.6: “Fruit nectar”. c) Subject to national legislation of the importing country, lemon (Citrus limon (L.) Burm. f. Citrus limonum Rissa) juice or lime (Citrus aurantifolia (Christm.)) juice, or both, may be added to fruit juice up to 3 g/l anhydrous citric acid equivalent for acidification purposes to unsweetened juices as defined in Sections 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.3, 2.1.4 and 2.1.5. Lemon juice or lime juice, or both, may be added up to 5 g/l anhydrous citric acid equivalent to fruit nectars as defined in Section 2.1.6: “Fruit nectar”. d) The addition of both sugars (defined in paragraphs a) and b) and acidifying agents (listed in the GSFA) to the same fruit juice is prohibited. e) Subject to national legislation of the importing country, the juice from Citrus reticulata and/or hybrids with reticulata may be added to orange juice in an amount not to exceed 10 percent of soluble solids of the reticulata to the total of soluble solids of orange juice. f) Salt and spices and aromatic herbs (and their natural extracts) may be added to tomato juice. g) For the purposes of product fortification, essential nutrients (e.g. vitamins, minerals) may be added to products defined in Section 2.1: “Product definition”. Such additions shall comply with the texts of the CAC established for this purpose. 3.2 Quality criteria The fruit juices and fruit nectars shall have the characteristic colour, aroma and flavour of juice from the same kind of fruit from which it is made. The fruit shall retain no more water from washing, steaming or other preparatory operations than technologically unavoidable. 3.3 Authenticity Authenticity is the maintenance of the product’s essential physical, chemical, organoleptic, and nutritional characteristics of the fruit(s) from which it comes. x Termed “white sugar” and “mill sugar” in the Standard for sugars (CXS 212-1999). xi Termed “dextrose anhydrous” in the Standard for sugars (CXS 212-1999). -- 6 of 28 -- 5 GENERAL STANDARD FOR FRUIT JUICES AND NECTARS (CXS 247-2005) 3.4 Verification of composition, quality and authenticity Fruit juices and nectars should be subject to testing for authenticity, composition and quality, where applicable and where required. The analytical methods used should be those found in Section 9: “Methods of analysis and sampling”. The verification of a sample’s authenticity/quality can be assessed by comparison of data for the sample, generated using appropriate methods included in the standard, with that produced for fruit of the same type and from the same region, allowing for natural variations, seasonal changes and for variations occurring due to processing. 4 Food additives Food additives listed in Tables 1 and 2 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995) in food categories 14.1.2.1 (Fruit juice), 14.1.2.3 (Concentrates for fruit juice), 14.1.3.1 (Fruit nectar) and 14.1.3.3 (Concentrates for fruit nectar) may be used in foods subject to this standard. -- 7 of 28 -- 6 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 5 Processing a