CODEX STAN 186 Page 1 of 4 Amended 2005. STANDARD FOR PRICKLY PEAR (CODEX STAN 186-1993) 1. DEFINITION OF PRODUCE This Standard applies to the fruit of commercial varieties of prickly pears grown from Opuntia ficus indica, O. streptachanthae, and O. lindheimeiri, of the Cactaceae family, to be supplied fresh to the consumer, after preparation and packaging. Prickly pears for industrial processing are excluded. 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, the prickly pears must be: - whole; - sound, produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded; - clean, practically free of any visible foreign matter; - practically free of damage caused by pests; - free of abnormal external moisture, excluding condensation following removal from cold storage; - free of any foreign smell and/or taste; - firm; - fresh in appearance; - free of damage caused by low temperatures; - free of prickles; - free of pronounced blemishes; - sufficiently developed and display satisfactory ripeness, depending on the nature of the produce. Depending on the prickly pear variety, the receptacle of the fruit will be flat or slightly hollow. The prickly pears must have a shape, colour, taste and smell characteristic of the species. 2.1.1 The development and condition of the prickly pears must be such as to enable them: - to withstand transport and handling; and - to arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 2.2 CLASSIFICATION Prickly pears are classified in three classes defined below: 2.2.1 “Extra” Class Prickly pears in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. They must be free of defects, with the exception of very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. 2.2.2 Class I Prickly pears in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: -- 1 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 186 Page 2 of 4 - slight defects in shape and colour; - slight skin defects such as bruising, sunspots, crusting, blemishes or other superficial defects. The total area affected shall not exceed 4%. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 2.2.3 Class II This class includes prickly pears which do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes, but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 2.1 above. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. The following defects, however, may be allowed, provided the prickly pears retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation: - defects in shape and colour, as long as the produce has the characteristics common to prickly pears; - skin defects due to bruising, scarring, crusting sunspots or other defects. The total area affected shall not exceed 8%. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Size is determined by the weight of the prickly pear, in accordance with the following table: Size Code Weight (in grams) A 90 – 105 B 105 - 140 C 140 - 190 D 190 - 270 E > 270 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES Tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each package for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 QUALITY TOLERANCES 4.1.1 “Extra” Class Five percent by number or weight of prickly pears not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class I or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent by number or weight of prickly pears not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class II or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.3 Class II Ten percent by number or weight of prickly pears satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements, with the exception of produce affected by rotting, pronounced irregularities or any other deterioration rendering it unfit for consumption. -- 2 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 186 Page 3 of 4 4.2 SIZE TOLERANCES For “Extra” Class, 5%; and for Class I or Class II, 10%; by number or weight of prickly pears not satisfying the requirements as regards sizing, but falling within the class immediately above or below or those indicated in Section 3. 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 UNIFORMITY The contents of each package (or lot for produce presented in bulk) must be uniform and contain only prickly pears of the same origin, variety, quality and size. For “Extra” Class, colour and ripeness should be uniform. The visible part of the contents of the package (or lot for produce presented in bulk) must be representative of the entire contents. 5.2 PACKAGING Prickly pears must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new1, clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. Prickly pears shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Recommended International Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 44-1995). 5.2.1 Description of Containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of the prickly pears. Packages (or lot for produce presented in bulk) must be free of all foreign matter and smell. 6. MARKING OR LABELLING 6.1 CONSUMER PACKAGES In addition to the requirements of the Codex General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CODEX STAN 1-1985), the following specific provisions apply: 6.1.1 Nature of Produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the name of the produce and may be labelled as to name of the variety. 6.2 NON-RETAIL CONTAINERS Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. For produce transported in bulk these particulars must appear on a document accompanying the goods. 6.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher. Identification code (optional)2. 6.2.2 Nature of Produce Name of the produce if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety or commercial type (optional). 1 For the purposes of this Standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality. 2 The national legislation of a number of countries requires the explicit declaration of the name and address. However, in the case where a code mark is used, the reference “packer and/or dispatcher (or equivalent abbreviations)” has to be indicated in close connection with the code mark. -- 3 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 186 Page 4 of 4 6.2.3 Origin of Produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional or local place name. 6.2.4 Commercial Identification - Class; - Size (size code or weight range in grams); - Number of units (optional); - Net weight (optional). 6.2.5 Official Inspection Mark (optional) 7. CONTAMINANTS 7.1 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the Codex General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CODEX STAN 193-1995). 7.2 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 8. HYGIENE 8.1 It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this Standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the Recommended International Code of Practice – General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 53-2003), and other relevant Codex texts such as Codes of Hygienic Practice and Codes of Practice. 8.2 The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods (CAC/GL 21-1997). -- 4 of 4 --