CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PRE-PACKAGED FOODS CXS 1-1985 CXS 1-1985 ADOPTED 1985 AMENDED 2026 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 20 -- History of the standard 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, this standard was revised to update Sections 4.2.2, 4.3.4, and 4.7.1(vii), and Section 8.1.3.1. In addition, an annex on the guidelines on the use of precautionary allergen labelling was added. This publication was reformatted and published in 2026. 2024 Revisions Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2024, this standard was revised to address food allergen labelling through changes/additions to Section 2: “Definition of terms”, Section 6: “Exemptions from mandatory labelling requirements”, Section 8: “Presentation of mandatory information”, and Sections 4.2.1.3, 4.2.1.4, 4.2.3, 4.2.3.1 and 4.2.4.2. Amendments and revisions made prior to 2024: Amended in 1991, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2008 and 2010. Revised in 2018. Adopted in 1985. -- 2 of 20 -- 1 GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PRE PACKAGED FOODS (CXS 1-1985) 1 Scope This standard applies to the labelling of all pre-packaged foods to be offered as such to the consumer or for catering purposes and to certain aspects relating to the presentation thereof. 2 Definition of terms For the purpose of this standard: Allergenic food means a food (including ingredients, food additives and processing aids) that can elicit immunoglobulin class E (IgE)-mediated or other specific immune-mediated reactions in susceptible individuals. Claim means any representation which states, suggests or implies that a food has particular qualities relating to its origin, nutritional properties, nature, processing, composition or any other quality. Coeliac disease means a chronic immune-mediated intestinal disease in genetically predisposed individuals induced by exposure to dietary gluten proteins that come from wheat, rye, barley and triticale (a cross between wheat and rye). Consumer means persons and families purchasing and receiving food in order to meet their personal needs. Container means any packaging of food for delivery as a single item, whether by completely or partially enclosing the food and includes wrappers. A container may enclose several units or types of packages when such is offered to the consumer. For use in date marking of pre-packaged food: Best-before date or best quality-before date means the date which signifies the end of the period, under any stated storage conditions, during which the unopened product will remain fully marketable and will retain any specific qualities for which implied or express claims have been made. However, beyond the date the food may still be acceptable for consumption. Date of manufacture means the date on which the food becomes the product as described. This is not an indication of the durability of the product. Date of packaging means the date on which the food is placed in the immediate container in which it will be ultimately sold. This is not an indication of the durability of the product. Use-by date or expiration date means the date which signifies the end of the period under any stated storage conditions, after which the product should not be sold or consumed due to safety and quality reasons. Food means any substance, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, which is intended for human consumption, and includes drinks, chewing gum and any substance which has been used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of food but does not include cosmetics or tobacco or substances used only as drugs. Food additive means any substance not normally consumed as a food by itself and not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, whether or not it has nutritive value. The intentional addition of which to food for a technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food results, or may be reasonably expected to result, (directly or indirectly) in it or its by-products becoming a component of, or otherwise affecting the characteristics of such foods. The term does not include “contaminants” or substances added to food for maintaining or improving nutritional qualities. -- 3 of 20 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD Food allergen means the substance in an allergenic food, usually a protein or protein derivative that can elicit IgE-mediated or other specific immune-mediated reactions in susceptible individuals. Food allergy means a reproducible adverse health effect arising from an IgE antibody or non-IgE antibody immune-mediated response following oral exposure to a food. Foods for catering purposes means those foods for use in restaurants, canteens, schools, hospitals and similar institutions where food is offered for immediate consumption. Ingredient means any substance, including a food additive, used in the manufacture or preparation of a food and present in the final product although possibly in a modified form. Label means any tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other descriptive matter, written, printed, stencilled, marked, embossed or impressed on, or attached to, a container of food. Labelling includes any written, printed or graphic matter that is present on the label, accompanies the food, or is displayed near the food, including that for the purpose of promoting its sale or disposal. Lot means a definitive quantity of a commodity produced essentially under the same conditions. Pre-packaged means packaged or made up in advance in a container, ready for offer to the consumer, or for catering purposes. Processing aid means a substance or material, not including apparatus or utensils, and not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing of raw materials, foods or its ingredients, to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or processing and which may result in the non- intentional but unavoidable presence of residues or derivatives in the final product. 3 General principles 3.1 Pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling in a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding its character in any respect.i 3.2 Pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labelling by words, pictorial or other devices which refer to or are suggestive either directly or indirectly, of any other product with which such food might be confused, or in such a manner as to lead the purchaser or consumer to suppose that the food is connected with such other product. 4 Mandatory labelling of pre-packaged foods The following information shall appear on the label of pre-packaged foods as applicable to the food being labelled, except to the extent otherwise expressly provided in an individual Codex standard: 4.1 Name of the food 4.1.1 The name shall indicate the true nature of the food and normally be specific and not generic: 4.1.1.1 Where a name or names have been established for a food in a Codex standard, at least one of these names shall be used. i Examples of descriptions or presentations to which these general principles refer are given in the General guidelines on claims (CXG 1-1979). -- 4 of 20 -- 3 GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PRE PACKAGED FOODS (CXS 1-1985) 4.1.1.2 In other cases, the name prescribed by national legislation shall be used. 4.1.1.3 In the absence of any such name, either a common or usual name existing by common usage as an appropriate descriptive term which was not misleading or confusing to the consumer shall be used. 4.1.1.4 A “coined”, “fanciful”, “brand” name or “trade mark” may be used provided it accompanies one of the names provided in sections 4.1.1.1 to 4.1.1.3. 4.1.2 There shall appear on the label either in conjunction with, or in close proximity to, the name of the food, such additional words or phrases as necessary to avoid misleading or confusing the consumer in regard to the true nature and physical condition of the food including but not limited to the type of packing medium, style, and the condition or type of treatment it has undergone; for example: dried, concentrated, reconstituted, smoked. 4.2 List of ingredients 4.2.1 Except for single ingredient foods, a list of ingredients shall be declared on the label. 4.2.1.1 The list of ingredients shall be headed or preceded by an appropriate title which consists of or includes the term “ingredient”. 4.2.1.2 All ingredients shall be listed in descending order of ingoing weight (m/m) at the time of the manufacture of the food. 4.2.1.3 Where an ingredient is itself the product of two or more ingredients, such a compound ingredient may be declared, as such, in the list of ingredients, provided that it is immediately accompanied by a list, in brackets, of its ingredients in descending order of proportion (m/m). Where a compound ingredient (for which a name has been established in a Codex standard or in national legislation) constitutes less than 5 percent of the food, the ingredients need not be declared, except for the foods and ingredients listed in Section 4.2.1.4, Section 4.2.1.7 and, where applicable, Section 4.2.1.5 and food additives which serve a technological function in the finished product, need not be declared. -- 5 of 20 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 4.2.1.4 The following foods and ingredients are known to trigger food allergy or coeliac disease and shall always be declared as allergenic foods using the specified name in addition to or as part of the ingredient name,ii when intentionally present in the food: Foods and ingredients Specified name Cereals containing glutena − wheat and other Triticum species − rye and other Secale species − barley and other Hordeum species and products thereofb Wheat Rye Barley Crustacea and products thereof Crustacea Eggs and products thereof Egg Fish and products thereof Fish Peanuts and products thereof Peanut Milk and products thereof Milk Sesame and products thereof Sesame Specific tree nuts − almond (Prunus amygdalus) − cashew (Anacardium occidentale) − hazelnut (Corylus spp.) − pecan (Carya illinoinensis) − pistachio (Pistacia vera) − walnut (Juglans spp.) and products thereof Almond Cashew Hazelnut Pecan Pistachio Walnut Notes: a Includes spelt, Khorasan, and other specific cereals containing gluten that are species or hybridized strains under the genus names of Triticum, Secale and Hordeum. Specified names are to be used according to the associated genus. Hybridized strains are to use specified names in conjunction with all of the parent genera (e.g. wheat and rye for triticale). b In addition to the specified name of wheat, rye, and barley, the word “gluten” may be used. ii In accordance with Section 4.1.1, the ingredient declaration should specify the true nature of the food and be specific and not generic. -- 6 of 20 -- 5 GENERAL STANDARD FOR THE LABELLING OF PRE PACKAGED FOODS (CXS 1-1985) 4.2.1.5 In addition to the foods and ingredients listed in Section 4.2.1.4, the declaration of any other foods and ingredients as allergenic foods, including those listed below, may also be required,iii using a specified name in addition to or as part of the ingredient name.iv This shall be based on available risk assessment data for the respective population(s),v taking into account risk management considerations. Foods and ingredients Specified name Buckwheat and products thereof Buckwheat Celery and products thereof Celery Oats and other Avena species (and their hybridized strains) and products thereof* Oats Lupin and products thereof Lupin Mustard and products thereof Mustard Soybean and products thereof Soy Specific tree nuts − Brazil nut (Bertholletia excelsa) − Macadamia (Macadamia spp.) − Pine nut (Pinus spp.) and products thereof Brazil nut Macadamia Pine nut Note: 4.2.1.6 Regional or national competent authorities may exempt ingredients derived from foods listed in Section 4.2.1.4, and where applicable Section 4.2.1.5, from being declared as allergenic foods. Such exemptions shall be subject to a risk assessment to establish the safety of the allergenic food derivative.vi 4.2.1.7 Sulphite when present in concentrations of 10 mg/kg or more in a food,vii shall always be declared using the specified name “sulphite” or “sulfite” in addition to or as part of the ingredient name. 4.2.1.8 Added water shall be declared in the list of ingredients except when the water forms part of an ingredient such as brine, syrup or broth used in a compound food and declared as such in the list of ingredients. Water or other volatile ingredients evaporated in the course of manufacture need not be declared. 4.2.1.9 As an alternative to the general provisions of this section, dehydrated or condensed foods which are intended to be reconstituted by the addition of water only, the ingredients may be listed in order of proportion (m/m) in the reconstituted product provided that a statement such as “ingredients of the product when prepared in accordance with the directions on the label” is included. 4.2.2 For pre-packaged foods subject to Section 8.1.3.1, where the information is provided on the outer packaging, either separate lists of ingredients for each type of individually packaged food that makes up the container, or a combined list of ingredients shall be declared, as appropriate to the nature of the food such as whether the individually packaged foods are intended to be consumed separately or together. iii These foods and ingredients are not included in Section 4.2.1.4 but have been recommended to be considered for risk management at the regional or national level (see FAO and WHO Risk assessment of food allergens: Part 1: Review and validation of Codex Alimentarius priority allergen list through risk assessment https://doi.org/10.4060/cb9070en). iv In accordance with Section 4.1.1, the ingredient declaration should specify the true nature of the food and be specific and not generic. v The assessment of risk in the respective population(s) to be based on the evidence criteria of prevalence, potency and severity of immune-mediated adverse reactions to the food or ingredient as established by FAO and WHO Risk assessment of food allergens: Part 1: Review and validation of Codex Alimentarius priority allergen list through risk assessment. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb9070en vi For example, FAO and WHO (2024). Risk assessment of food allergens: Part 4: Establishing exemptions from mandatory declaration for priority food allergens https://doi.org/10.4060/cc9554en vii Sulphite measured on a sulphur dioxide (SO2) equivalents basis. - Oats can be tolerated by most but not all people who are intole