CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR CANNED FINFISH CXS 119-1981 CXS 119-1981 ADOPTED 1981 AMENDED 2024 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 8 -- History of the standard 2025 Corrigendum For consistency, the word analyses has been changed to analysis in Section 7: “Sampling, examination and analysis”. This publication was redesigned and published in 2026. 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, Section 6.2: “Labelling of non-retail containers” was added by replacing the text with a reference to the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021) and Section 7: “Sampling, examination and analyses” was amended by replacing methods of analysis and numeric performance criteria with a reference to the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). Amendments and revisions made prior to 2024: Amended in 2011, 2013, 2016 and 2018. Revised in 1995. Adopted in 1981. -- 2 of 8 -- STANDARD FOR CANNED FINFISH CXS 119-1981 1 1 Scope This standard applies to canned finfish packed in water, oil or other suitable packing medium. It does not apply to specialty products where the canned finfish constitutes less than 50 percent m/m of the net contents of the can or to canned finfish covered by other Codex product standards. 2 Description 2.1 Product definition Canned finfish is the product produced from the flesh of any species of finfish (other than canned finfish covered by other Codex product standards) which is suitable for human consumption and may contain a mixture of species, with similar sensory properties, from within the same genus. 2.2 Process definition Canned finfish are packed in hermetically sealed containers and shall have received a processing treatment sufficient to ensure commercial sterility. 2.3 Presentation Any presentation of the product shall be permitted provided that it: • meets all requirements of this standard; and • is adequately described on the label to avoid confusing or misleading the consumer. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Fish The product shall be prepared from sound finfish from which the heads, tails and viscera have been removed. The raw material shall be of a quality fit to be sold fresh for human consumption. 3.2 Other ingredients The packing medium and all other ingredients used shall be of food-grade quality and conform to all applicable Codex standards. 3.3 Decomposition Canned finfish of the Scombridae, Scombresocidae, Clupeidae, Coryphaenidae and Pomatomidae families shall not contain more than 10 mg/100 g of histamine based on the average of the sample units tested. -- 3 of 8 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3.4 Final product Products shall meet the requirements of this standard when lots examined in accordance with Section 9: “Lot acceptance” comply with the provisions set out in Section 8: “Definition of defectives”. Products shall be examined by the methods given in Section 7: “Sampling, examination and analysis”. 4 Food additives Only certain acidity regulators, emulsifiers, gelling agents, stabilizers and thickeners as indicated in Table 3 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995)1 are acceptable for use in foods conforming to this standard. The flavourings used in products covered by this standard should comply with the Guidelines for the use of flavourings (CXG 66-2008).2 Only natural flavouring substances, natural flavouring complexes and smoke flavourings are permitted in products covered by this standard. 5 Hygiene It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),3 the Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52-2003),4 the Code of hygienic practice for low and acidified lowacid canned foods (CXC 23-1979)5 and other relevant Codex codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. The products should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997).6 The final product shall be free from any foreign material that poses a threat to human health. When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination prescribed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC), the product: • shall be free from microorganisms capable of development under normal conditions of storage; and • no sample unit shall contain histamine that exceeds 20 mg per 100 g. This applies only to species of the Scombridae, Clupeidae, Coryphaenidae, Scombresocidae and Pomatomidae families. • shall not contain any other substance including substances derived from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health in accordance with standards established by the CAC; and • shall be free from container integrity defects which may compromise the hermetic seal. -- 4 of 8 -- STANDARD FOR CANNED FINFISH CXS 119-1981 3 6 Labelling In addition to the provisions of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985)7 the following specific provisions apply. 6.1 Name of the food The name of the product declared on the label shall be the common or usual name applied to the species in accordance with the law and custom of the country in which the product is sold, and in a manner not to mislead the consumer. The name of the product shall be qualified by a term descriptive of the presentation. The name of the packing medium shall form part of the name of the food. Where a mixture of species of the same genus are used, they shall be indicated on the label. In addition, the label shall include other descriptive terms that will avoid misleading or confusing the consumer. 6.2 Labelling of non-retail containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of nonretail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021).8 7 Sampling, examination and analysis 7.1 Sampling • Sampling of lots for examination of the final product as prescribed in Section 3.4: “Final product” shall be in accordance with an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5. • Sampling of lots for examination of net weight and drained weight, where appropriate, shall be carried out in accordance with an appropriate sampling plan meeting the criteria established by the CAC. 7.2 Examination 7.2.1 Sensory and physical examination Samples taken for sensory and physical examination shall be assessed by persons trained in such examination and in accordance with the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)9 and the Guidelines for the sensory evaluation of fish and shellfish in laboratories (CXG 31-1999).10 7.3 Analysis For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. -- 5 of 8 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 8 Definition of defectives A sample unit will be considered defective when it exhibits any of the properties defined below. 8.1 Foreign matter The presence in the sample unit of any matter, which has not been derived from fish or the packing medium, does not pose a threat to human health, and is readily recognized without magnification or is present at a level determined by any method including magnification that indicates non-compliance with good manufacturing and sanitation practices. 8.2 Odour/flavour A sample unit affected by persistent and distinct objectionable odours or flavours indicative of decomposition or rancidity. 8.3 Texture • excessive mushy flesh uncharacteristic of the species in the presentation; • excessively tough flesh uncharacteristic of the species in the presentation; or • honeycombed flesh in excess of 5 percent of the drained contents. 8.4 Discolouration A sample unit affected by distinct discolouration of the flesh indicative of decomposition or rancidity or by sulphide staining of more than 5 percent of the drained contents. 8.5 Objectionable matter A sample unit affected by Struvite crystals – any struvite crystal greater than 5 mm in length. 9 Lot acceptance A lot shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this standard when: • the total number of defectives as classified according to Section 8: “Definition of defectives” does not exceed the acceptance number (c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5; • the total number of sample units not meeting the presentation defined in Section 2.3: “Presentation” does not exceed the acceptance number (c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5; • the average net weight and the average drained weight where appropriate of all sample units examined is not less than the declared weight, and provided there is no unreasonable shortage in any individual container; and • the food additives, hygiene and handling and labelling requirements of Section 4: “Food additives”, Section 5: “Hygiene” and Section 6: “Labelling” are met. -- 6 of 8 -- STANDARD FOR CANNED FINFISH CXS 119-1981 5 Referenced texts 1 General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995). 2 Guidelines for the use of flavourings (CXG 66-2008). 3 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 4 Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52-2003). 5 Code of hygienic practice for low and acidified low-acid canned foods (CXC 23-1979). 6 Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria for foods (CXG 21-1997). 7 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 8 General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021). 9 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). 10 Guidelines for the sensory evaluation of fish and shellfish in laboratories (CXG 31-1999). -- 7 of 8 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for canned finfish. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 119-1981. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/ce0088en Some rights reserved. This work is made axvailable under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 8 of 8 --