CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR SORGHUM GRAINS CXS 172-1989 CXS 172-1989 ADOPTED 1989 AMENDED 2026 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 10 -- History of the standard 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, the Annex was amended by replacing the method of analysis for the determination of crude fibre with a reference to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” which in turn references the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). 2026 corrigendum In July 2026, transcription errors in the annex were corrected to more clearly indicate limits for defects, based on the report from CCCPL9. This publication was reformatted and published in 2026. 2023 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2023, amendments were made in the Annex. 2023 editorial correction An editorial correction was made to Section 3.2.3: “Toxic or noxious seeds” to read Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp.) instead of Crotolaria (Crotalaria spp.), and footnote 1 was added in the Annex. Amendments and revisions made prior to 2023: Revised in 1995. Amended in 2019. Adopted in 1989. -- 2 of 10 -- 1 STANDARD FOR SORGHUM GRAINS (CXS 172-1989) 1 Scope This standard applies to sorghum grains as defined in Section 2: “Description”, for human consumption; i.e. ready for its intended use as human food, presented in packaged form or sold loose from the package directly to the consumer. It does not apply to other products derived from sorghum grains. 2 Description 2.1 Definition of the product Sorghum grains are whole or decorticated grains obtained from species of Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench. They may be suitably dried if necessary. 2.1.1 Whole sorghum grains These are sorghum grains obtained as such after a complete threshing without any further treatment. 2.1.2 Decorticated sorghum grains These are sorghum grains from which the external casings and whole or parts of the germ have been removed in an appropriate manner, using mechanical treatment. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Quality factors – general a) Sorghum grains shall be safe and suitable for human consumption. b) Sorghum grains shall be free from abnormal flavours, odours, and living insects. c) Sorghum grains shall be free from filth (impurities of animal origin, including dead insects) in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. 3.2 Quality factors – specific 3.2.1 Moisture content 14.5 percent m/m max. Lower moisture limits should be required for certain destinations in relation to the climate, duration of transport, and storage. 3.2.2 Definition of defects The product shall have not more than 8 percent total defects including extraneous matter, inorganic extraneous matter, and filth as contained in the standards and blemished grains, diseased grains, broken kernels, and other grains as contained in the Annex. 3.2.2.1 Extraneous matter is all organic and inorganic material other than sorghum, broken kernels, other grains and filth. Extraneous matter includes loose sorghum seedcoats. Sorghum grains shall have not more than 2 percent extraneous matter, of which not more than 0.5 percent shall be extraneous inorganic matter. 3.2.2.2 Filth is impurities of animal origin including dead insects (0.1 percent m/m max). -- 3 of 10 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD i It is recommended to consult regularly CXS 193-1995 for the maximum levels. 3.2.3 Toxic or noxious seeds The products covered by the provisions of this standard shall be free from the following toxic or noxious seeds in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health: • Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp.); • corn cockle (Agrostemma githago L.); • castor beans (Ricinus communis L.); • Jimson weed (Datura spp.); and • other seeds that are commonly recognized as harmful to health. 3.2.4 Tannin content a) For whole sorghum grains, the tannin content shall not exceed 0.5 percent on a dry matter basis. b) For decorticated sorghum grains, the tannin content shall not exceed 0.3 percent on a dry matter basis. 4 Contaminants 4.1 Heavy metals Sorghum grains shall be free from heavy metals in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. 4.2 Pesticide residues Sorghum grains shall comply with those maximum residue limits established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) for this commodity. 4.3 Mycotoxins Sorghum grains shall comply with those maximum mycotoxin limits established by the CAC for this commodity. 5 Hygiene a) It is recommended that the product covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969)1 and other codes of practice recommended by the CAC which are relevant to this product. b) To the extent possible in good manufacturing practice, the product shall be free from objectionable matter. c) When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination, the product: • shall be free from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health; • shall be free from parasites which may represent a hazard to health; and • shall not contain any substance originating from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. -- 4 of 10 -- 3 STANDARD FOR SORGHUM GRAINS (CXS 172-1989) 6 Packaging a) Sorghum grains shall be packaged in containers which will safeguard the hygienic, nutritional, technological, and organoleptic qualities of the product. b) The containers, including packaging material, shall be made of substances which are safe and suitable for their intended use. They should not impart any toxic substance or undesirable odour or flavour to the product. c) When the product is packaged in sacks, these must be clean, sturdy and strongly sewn or sealed. 7 Labelling In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),2 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 Name of the product The name of the product to be shown on the label shall be “sorghum grains”. 7.2 Labelling of non-retail containers Information for non-retail containers shall either be given on the container or in accompanying documents, except that the name of the product, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer shall appear on the container. However, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer may be replaced by an identification mark, provided that such a mark is clearly identifiable with the accompanying documents. 8 Methods of analysis and sampling For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)3 relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. -- 5 of 10 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD ANNEX In those instances where more than one factor limit and/or method of analysis is given, we strongly recommend that users specify the appropriate limit and method of analysis. Factor/description Limit Method of analysis Colour • White, pink, red, brown, orange, yellow, or any mixture of these colours. Buyer preference Visual examination • Abnormal colour. Grains whole natural colour has been modified by bad weather conditions, contact with the ground, heat, and excessive respiration. These grains may be dull, shrivelled, swollen, puffed, or bloated in appearance. Ash • Decorticated sorghum grains Max: 1.5% on a dry matter basis Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Protein (N x 6.25) Min: 7% on a dry matter basis Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Fat Max: 4% on a dry matter basis Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Crude fibre Buyer preference Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Defects (Total) Max: (Total) 8%i Visual examination • Blemished grains. Grains which are insect of vermin damaged, of abnormal colour, sprouted, diseased, or otherwise materially damaged. Max: 3% of which diseased grains must not exceed 0.5% - Diseased grains. Grains made unsafe for human consumption due to decay, moulding, or bacterial decomposition, or other causes that may be noticed without having to cut the grains open to examine them. - Insect or vermin damaged grains. Kernels with obvious weevil-bored holes or which have evidence of boring or tunnelling, indicating the presence of insects, insect webbing or insect refuse, or degermed grains, chewed in one or more than one part of the kernel which exhibit evident traces of an attack by vermin. i The maximum amount of defects includes those from this Annex and Section 3.2.2: “Definition of defects” of the standard. -- 6 of 10 -- 5 STANDARD FOR SORGHUM GRAINS (CXS 172-1989) Factor/description Limit Method of analysis - Grains having an abnormal colour. Grains whose natural colour has been modified by bad weather conditions, contact with the ground, heat, and excessive respiration. These grains may be dull, shrivelled, swollen, puffed, or bloated in appearance. - Sprouted grains. Grains exhibiting obvious signs of sprouting. - Frost-damaged grains. Grains which are damaged by frost and may appear bleached or blistered and the seed coat may be peeling. Germs may appear dead or discoloured. • Broken kernels. Sorghum and pieces of sorghum which pass through a 1.8 mm round-hole sieve. Max: 5% • Other grains which are edible grains, whole or identifiable brokens, other than sorghum (i.e. legumes, pulses and other edible cereals). Max: 1% -- 7 of 10 -- 6 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD REFERENCED TEXTS 1 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 2 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 3 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). -- 8 of 10 -- -- 9 of 10 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for sorghum grains. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 172-1989. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/ce0313en Some rights reserved. This work is made available under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 10 of 10 --