STANDARD FOR A BLEND OF EVAPORATED SKIMMED MILK AND VEGETABLE FAT CXS 250-2006 Adopted in 2006. Amended in 2010, 2018, 2021, 2022. -- 1 of 5 -- CXS 250-2006 2 2022 Amendment The following amendment was made to the text of the standard following decisions taken at the forty-fifth session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022. Page Location Text in previous version Text in amended version 5 Section 7.6 Labelling of Non-Retail Containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Containers of Foods (CXS 346-2021). -- 2 of 5 -- CXS 250-2006 3 1. SCOPE This Standard applies to a blend of evaporated skimmed milk and vegetable fat, also known as a blend of unsweetened condensed skimmed milk and vegetable fat, which is intended for direct consumption, or further processing, in conformity with the description in Section 2 of this Standard. 2. DESCRIPTION A blend of evaporated skimmed milk and vegetable fat is a product prepared by recombining milk constituents and potable water, or by the partial removal of water and the addition of edible vegetable oil, edible vegetable fat or a mixture thereof, to meet the compositional requirements in Section 3 of this Standard. 3. ESSENTIAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY FACTORS 3.1 Raw materials Skimmed milk and skimmed milk powders1, other non-fat milk solids, and edible vegetable fats/oils.1 The following milk products are allowed for protein adjustment purposes: – Milk retentate: Milk retentate is the product obtained by concentrating milk protein by ultra-filtration of milk, partly skimmed milk, or skimmed milk; – Milk permeate: Milk permeate is the product obtained by removing milk protein and milk fat from milk, partly skimmed milk, or skimmed milk by ultra-filtration; and – Lactose1 3.2 Permitted ingredients – Potable water – Sodium chloride and/or potassium chloride as salt substitute. 3.3 Permitted nutrients Where allowed in accordance with the General Principles for the Addition of Essential Nutrients to Food (CXG 9-1987), maximum and minimum levels for Vitamins A, D and other nutrients, where appropriate, should be laid down by national legislation in accordance with the needs of individual country including, where appropriate, the prohibition of the use of particular nutrients. 3.4 Composition Blend of evaporated skimmed milk and vegetable fat Minimum total fat 7.5% m/m Minimum milk solids-not-fat(a) 17.5% m/m Minimum milk protein in milk solids-not-fat(a) 34% m/m Reduced fat blend of evaporated skimmed milk and vegetable fat Total fat More than 1% and less than 7.5% m/m Minimum milk solids-not-fat(a) 19% m/m Minimum milk protein in milk solids-not-fat(a) 34% m/m (a) The milk solids-not-fat content includes water of crystallization of the lactose. 1 For specification, see relevant Codex Standard. -- 3 of 5 -- CXS 250-2006 4 4. FOOD ADDITIVES Only those additive classes indicated as justified in the table below may be used for the product categories specified. Acidity regulators used in accordance with Tables 1 and 2 of the General Standard for Food Additives (CXS 192-1995) in food category 01.3.2 (Beverage whiteners), and only certain acidity regulators, emulsifiers, stabilizers and thickeners in Table 3 are acceptable for use in foods conforming to this Standard. Additive functional class Justified use Colours - Bleaching agents - Acidity regulators X Stabilizers X Thickeners X Emulsifiers X Antioxidants - Preservatives - Foaming agents - Anticaking agents - Packaging gas - X The use of additives belonging to the class is technologically justified. – The use of additives belonging to the class is not technologically justified. 5. CONTAMINANTS The products covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels for contaminants that are specified for the product in the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193- 1995). The milk used in the manufacture of the products covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels for contaminants and toxins specified for milk by the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193-1995) and with the maximum residue limits for veterinary drug residues and pesticides established for milk by the CAC. The vegetable oils/fat used in the manufacture of the products covered by this Standard shall comply with the Maximum Levels for contaminants and toxins specified for the oils/fats by the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193-1995) and with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established for the oils/fats by the CAC. 6. HYGIENE It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this Standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969), the Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products (CXC 57-2004) and other relevant Codex texts such as Codes of Hygienic Practice and Codes of Practice. The products should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods (CXG 21-1997). 7. LABELLING In addition to the provision of the General Standard for the Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods (CXS 1-1985) the following specific provisions apply. 7.1 Name of the food The name of the food shall be: – Blend of Evaporated Skimmed Milk and Vegetable Fat; or – Reduced Fat Blend of Evaporated Skimmed Milk and Vegetable Fat Other names may be used if allowed by national legislation in the country of retail sale. -- 4 of 5 -- CXS 250-2006 5 7.2 Declaration of total fat content The total fat content shall be declared in a manner found acceptable in the country of sale to the final consumer, either (i) as a percentage by mass or volume, or (ii) in grams per serving as quantified in the label provided that the number of servings is stated. A statement shall appear on the label as to the presence of edible vegetable fat and/or edible vegetable oil. When required by the country of retail sale, the common name of the vegetable from which the fat or oil is derived shall be included in the name of the food or as a separate statement. 7.3 Declaration of milk protein The milk protein content shall be declared in a manner acceptable in the country of sale to the final consumer, either (i) as a percentage by mass or volume, or (ii) in grams per serving as quantified in the label provided that the number of servings is stated. 7.4 List of ingredients Notwithstanding the provision of Section 4.2.1 of the General Standard for the Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods (CXS 1-1985) milk products used only for protein adjustment need not be declared. 7.5 Advisory statement A statement shall appear on the label to indicate that the product should not be used as a substitute for infant formula. For example, “NOT SUITABLE FOR INFANTS”. 7.6 Labelling of non-retail containers. The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Containers of Foods (CXS 346-2021). 8. METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING For checking the compliance with this Standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended Methods of Analysis and Sampling (CXS 234-1999) relevant to the provisions in this Standard, shall be used. -- 5 of 5 --