Title: Standard for named vegetable oils Code/Reference (use for filename): CXS 210-1999 Series title: Codex Alimentarius Standard Adopted date: Adopted 1999 Additional date: Amended 2026 History page 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” and Appendix, Section 5: “Methods of analysis and sampling” were amended by replacing the methods of analysis with a reference to the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). 2026 Corrigenda In July 2026, a transcription error in Table 1 was corrected where the fatty acid composition values for Mustardseed oil were transcribed into the rows for Palm oil and Palm oil with a higher oleic acid when the standard was redesigned and published earlier in the year. In March 2026, a footnote that read: “The fatty acid values in this table apply to the vegetable oils described in Section 2.1: “Product definitions” presented in a state for human consumption. However, in order to provide clarity in trade of crude oils, the values of the table may also be applied for the corresponding crude forms of the vegetable oils described in Section 2.1: “Product definitions”.” was removed from Table A3 and Table A4. This footnote had been incorrectly added to these tables following the decision to adopt the addition of the footnote to Table 1 by CAC42 (citing REP19/FO paragraph 137 and Appendix II, Part A2). This publication was reformatted and published in 2026. 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2024, avocado oil, camellia seed oil, Sacha inchi oil and soya bean oil – high-oleic acid were added in Section 2: “Description”, Section 3: “Essential composition and quality factors”, Table 1, tables A2-A4, and amendments were made in Section 7.2: “Labelling of non-retail containers”. 2023 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2023, amendments were made in Section 4: “Food additives”, Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” and in the Appendix, Section 5: “Methods of analysis and sampling”. 2022 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-fifth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022, amendments were made in Table 1 and Table 2 with regard to the values of the provisions for fatty acid C18:1 and C18:2, relative density, refractive density and saponification in sunflower seed oil. Amendments and revisions made prior to 2022: Amended in 2005, 2011, 2013, 2015, 2019 and 2021. Revised in 2001, 2003, 2009, 2017 and 2019. -- 1 of 14 -- CXS 210-1999 2 Adopted in 1999. Table of contents: NO BACK COVER Citation: FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for named vegetable oils. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 2101999. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. Copyright year 2026 -- 2 of 14 -- CXS 210-1999 3 1. Scope This standard applies to the vegetable oils described in Section 2.1: “Product definitions”, presented in a state for human consumption. 2. Description 2.1 Product definitions (Note: synonyms are in brackets immediately following the name of the oil) Almond oil is derived from the kernel of almond fruit (Amygdalus communis L.). Avocado oil may be derived from either the mesocarp of avocado fruit (Persea americana) or obtained by processing the whole avocado fruit. Arachis oil (peanut oil; groundnut oil) is derived from groundnuts (seeds of Arachis hypogaea L.). Babassu oil is derived from the kernel of the fruit of several varieties of the palm Orbignya spp. Camellia seed oil (youcha oil) is derived from the seeds of cultivated Camellia species (C. oleifera, C. chekiangoleosa, C. japonica and C. vietnamensis). Coconut oil is derived from the kernel of the coconut (Cocos nucifera L.). Cottonseed oil is derived from the seeds of various cultivated species of Gossypium spp. Flaxseed (Linseed) oil is derived from the seeds of various cultivated species of Linum usitatissimum Grapeseed oil is derived from the seeds of the grape (Vitis vinifera L.). Hazelnut oil is derived from the kernel of hazelnut fruit (Corylus avellana L.). Maize oil (corn oil) is derived from maize germ (the embryos of Zea mays L.). Mustard seed oil is derived from the seeds of white mustard (Sinapis alba L. or Brassica hirta Moench), brown and yellow mustard (Brassica juncea (L.) Czernajew and Cossen) and of black mustard (Brassica nigra (L.) Koch). Palm kernel oil is derived from the kernel of the fruit of the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis). Palm kernel olein is the liquid fraction derived from fractionation of palm kernel oil (described above). Palm kernel stearin is the solid fraction derived from fractionation of palm kernel oil (described above). Palm oil is derived from the fleshy mesocarp of the fruit of the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis). Palm oil with a higher content of oleic acid is derived from the fleshy mesocarp of hybrid palm fruit (OxG) (Elaeis oleifera x Elaeis guineensis) Palm olein is the liquid fraction derived from the fractionation of palm oil (described above). Palm stearin is the high-melting fraction derived from the fractionation of palm oil (described above). Palm superolein is a liquid fraction derived from palm oil (described above) produced through a specially controlled crystallization process to achieve an iodine value of 60 or higher. Pistachio oil is derived from the kernel of pistachio fruit (Pistacia vera L.). Rapeseed oil (turnip rape oil; colza oil; ravison oil; sarson oil: toria oil) is produced from seeds of Brassica napus L., Brassica rapa L., Brassica juncea L. and Brassica tournefortii Gouan species. Rapeseed oil – low-erucic acid (low-erucic acid turnip rape oil; low-erucic acid colza oil; canola oil) is produced from low-erucic acid oil-bearing seeds of varieties derived from the Brassica napus L., Brassica rapa L. and Brassica juncea L., species. Rice bran oil (rice oil) is derived from the bran of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Sacha inchi oil is derived from the seeds of sacha inchi (Plukenetia volubilis L.). Safflower seed oil (safflower oil; carthamus oil; kurdee oil) is derived from safflower seeds (seeds of Carthamus tinctorious L.). -- 3 of 14 -- CXS 210-1999 4 Safflower seed oil – high-oleic acid (high-oleic acid safflower oil; high-oleic acid carthamus oil; high-oleic acid kurdee oil) is produced from high-oleic acid oil-bearing seeds of varieties derived from Carthamus tinctorious L. Sesame seed oil (sesame oil; gingelly oil; benne oil; ben oil; till oil; tillie oil) is derived from sesame seeds (seeds of Sesamum indicum L.). Soya bean oil (soybean oil) is derived from soya beans (seeds of Glycine max (L.) Merr.). Soya bean oil – high-oleic acid (soybean oil – high-oleic acid; high-oleic acid soya bean oil; high-oleic acid soybean oil) is produced from high-oleic acid oil-bearing seeds of varieties derived from soya beans (seeds of Glycine max (L.) Merr.). Sunflower seed oil (sunflower oil) is derived from sunflower seeds (seeds of Helianthus annuus L.). Sunflower seed oil – high-oleic acid (high-oleic acid sunflower oil) is produced from high-oleic acid oil-bearing seeds of varieties derived from sunflower seeds (seeds of Helianthus annuus L.). Sunflower seed oil – mid-oleic acid (mid-oleic acid sunflower oil) is produced from mid-oleic acid oil-bearing sunflower seeds (seeds of Helianthus annuus L.). Walnut oil is derived from the kernel of walnut fruit (Juglans regia L.). 2.2 Other definitions Edible vegetable oils are foodstuffs which are composed primarily of glycerides of fatty acids obtained only from vegetable sources. They may contain small amounts of other lipids such as phosphatides, of unsaponifiable constituents, and of free fatty acids naturally present in the fat or oil. Virgin oils are obtained, without altering the nature of the oil, by mechanical procedures, e.g. expelling or pressing, and the application of heat only. They may have been purified by washing with water, settling, filtering and centrifuging only. Cold-pressed oils are obtained, without altering the oil, by mechanical procedures only e.g. expelling or pressing, without the application of heat. They may have been purified by washing with water, settling, filtering and centrifuging only. 3. Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Gas-liquid chromatography (GLC) ranges of fatty acid composition (expressed as percentages) Samples falling within the appropriate ranges specified in Table 1 are in compliance with this standard. Supplementary criteria, for example national geographical and/or climatic variations, may be considered, as necessary, to confirm that a sample complies with the standard. Low-erucic acid rapeseed oil must not contain more than 2 percent erucic acid (as percentage of total fatty acids). High-oleic acid safflower oil must contain not less than 70 percent oleic acid (as percentage of total fatty acids). High-oleic acid soya bean oil must contain not less than 65 percent oleic acid (as a percentage of total fatty acids). High-oleic acid sunflower oil must contain not less than 75 percent oleic acid (as percentage of total fatty acids). Palm oil with a higher content of oleic acid must contain not less than 48 percent oleic acid (as percentage of total fatty acids). 3.2 Slip point Palm kernel olein Palm kernel stearin Palm olein Palm stearin Palm superolein between 21 °C and 26 °C between 31 °C and 34 °C not more than 24 °C not less than 44 °C not more than 19.5 °C -- 4 of 14 -- CXS 210-1999 5 4. Food additives Antifoaming agents, antioxidants and emulsifiers used in accordance with Table 1 and Table 2 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995)1 in food category 02.1.2 (Vegetable oils and fats) are acceptable for use in foods conforming to this standard. No food additives are permitted in virgin or cold-pressed oils. The flavourings used in products covered by this standard should comply with the Guidelines for the use of flavourings (CXG 66-2008).2 5. Contaminants The products covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995).3 The products covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 6. Hygiene It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969)4 and other relevant Codex Alimentarius texts such as codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. The products should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997).5 7. Labelling 7.1 Name of the food The product shall be labelled in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985).6 The name of the oil shall conform to the descriptions given in Section 2: “Description” of this standard. Where more than one name is given for a product in Section 2.1: “Product definitions”, the labelling of that product must include one of those names acceptable in the country of use. 7.2 Labelling of non-retail containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021).7 8. Methods of analysis and sampling For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)8 relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. -- 5 of 14 -- CXS 210-1999 6 Table 1: Fatty acid composition of vegetable oils as determined by gas-liquid chromatography from authentic samples*,** (expressed as percentage of total fatty acids) (see Section 3.1: “Gas-liquid chromatography (GLC) ranges of fatty acid composition” of the standard) a To update this table, please refer to the Excel document titled “CXS_210-1999_Table_1". This document is saved in the Sharepoint file for this record. Notes: * Data taken from species as listed in Section 2: “Description”. ** The fatty acid values in this table apply to the vegetable oils described in Section 2.1: “Product definitions” presented in a state for human consumption. However, in order to provide clarity in trade of crude oils, the values of the table may also be applied for the corresponding crude forms of the vegetable oils described in Section 2.1: “Product definitions”. *** Fractionated product from palm oil. ND – Non detectable, defined as ≤ 0.05%. -- 6 of 14 -- CXS 210-1999 7 APPENDIX Other quality and composition factors These quality and composition factors are supplementary information to the essential composition and quality factors of the standard. A product which meets the essential quality and composition factors but does not meet these supplementary factors may still conform to the standard. 1. Quality characteristics The colour, odour and taste of each product shall be characteristic of the designated product. It shall be free from foreign and rancid odour and taste. Table A1 Maximum level Matter volatile at 105 °C 0.2% m/m Insoluble impurities 0.05% m/m Soap content 0.005% m/m Iron (Fe): Refined oils 1.5 mg/kg Virgin oils Crude palm kernel olein Crude palm kernel stearin 5.0 mg/kg 5.0 mg/kg 7.0 mg/kg Copper (Cu) Refined oils 0.1 mg/kg Virgin oils 0.4 mg/kg Acid value Refined oils 0.6 mg KOH/g oil Cold-pressed and virgin oils (except crude palm kernel oil and virgin palm oil) 4.0 mg KOH/g oil Free fatty acid Virgin palm oil 5.0% (as palmitic acid) Crude palm kernel oil 4.0% (as lauric acid) Refined rice bran oil 0.3% (as oleic acid) Peroxide value Refined oils up to 10 milliequivalents of active oxygen/kg oil Cold-pressed and virgin oils up to 15 milliequivalents of active oxygen/kg oil 2. Composition characteristics The arachidic and higher fatty acid content of arachis oil should not exceed 48 g/kg. The Reichert values for coconut, palm kernel and babassu oils should be in the ranges 6–8.5, 4–7 and 4.5– 6.5, respectively. The Polenske values for coconut, palm kernel and babassu oils should be in the ranges 13–18, 8–12 and 8– 10, respectively. The Halphen test for cotton seed oil should be positive. The erythrodiol content of grapeseed oil should be more than 2 percent of the total sterols. -- 7 of 14 -- CXS 210-1999 8 The total carotenoids (as beta-carotene) for unbleached palm oil, unbleached palm olein and unbleached palm stearin should be in the range of 500–2 000, 550–2 500 and 300–1 500 mg/kg, respectively. The Crismer value for low-erucic acid rapeseed oil should be in the range 67–70. The concentration of brassicasterol in low-erucic acid rapeseed oil shoul