CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR STURGEON CAVIAR CXS 291-2010 CXS 291-2010 ADOPTED 2010 AMENDED 2024 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 10 -- History of the standard This publication was redesigned and published in 2026. 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, amendments were made in Section 7.4: “Labelling of non-retail containers” by adding a text with a reference to the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021); and Section 8: “Sampling, examination and analysis” was amended by replacing methods of analysis and numeric performance criteria with a reference to the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234 1999). Amendments made prior to 2024: Amended in 2013 and 2018. Adopted in 2010. -- 2 of 10 -- 1 STANDARD FOR STURGEON CAVIAR (CXS 291-2010) 1 Scope This standard applies to granular sturgeon caviar of the fish of the Acipenseridae family. 2 Description 2.1 Definitions The following definitions are used in this standard: Fish eggs: non-ovulated eggs separated from the connective tissue of ovaries. Ovulated eggs may be used from aquacultured sturgeons. Caviar: the product made from fish eggs of the Acipenseridae family by treating with food-grade salt. 2.2 Product definition The product is prepared from fish eggs of sturgeon fish belonging to the Acipenseridae family (four genera Acipenser, Huso, Pseudoscaphirhynchus and Scaphirhynchus and hybrid species of these genera). The eggs are of about one size and evenly and characteristically coloured according to the species used. Colour can vary from light grey to black or from light yellow to yellowish grey. Brownish and greenish shades are permissible. The product is made with addition of salt and is intended for direct human consumption. The salt content of the product is equal or above 3 g/100 g and below or equal to 5 g/100 g in the end product. 2.3 Process definition The product, after suitable preliminary preparation of the caviar, shall be subject to treatment or conditions sufficient to prevent the growth of spore and non-spore forming pathogenic microorganisms and shall comply with the conditions laid down hereafter. Ovulated eggs are harvested after hormonal induction of ovulation of the female. The eggs are appropriately treated to remove adhesive layer and to harden the shell. If hormones are used to produce ovulated eggs, they should be approved for use by the competent authority having jurisdiction. The product shall be prepared by salting fish eggs with food-grade salt. During packaging, storage and retail, the product temperature is between +2 °C and +4 °C, whereas for wholesale business, including storage and transportation, the temperatures are between 0 °C and -4 °C. Freezing as well as frozen storage of caviar is not permitted unless the deterioration of quality is avoided. The product shall be packed in: • metal tins coated inside with stable food lacquer or enamel; • glass jars; or • other suitable food-grade containers. Re-packaging of the product from larger to smaller containers under controlled conditions which maintain the quality and safety of the product shall be permitted. No mixing of caviar from different sturgeon species or lots shall be permitted. -- 3 of 10 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Raw material Caviar shall be prepared from fish eggs extracted from sound and wholesome sturgeons of biological species of the genera described in Section 2.2: “Product definition”, which are of a quality fit to be sold fresh for human consumption. 3.2 Salt Salt shall be of food-grade quality and conform to all applicable Codex standards. 3.3 Final product The product shall meet the requirements of the present standard, when a lot examined in accordance with the requirements described in Section 10: “Lot acceptance” complies with the provisions set out in Section 9: “Definition of defects”. The product shall be examined by the methods given in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999).1 4 Food additives Acidity regulators, antioxidants and preservatives listed in Table 3 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995)2 are acceptable for use in foods conforming to this standard. 5 Contaminants The products covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995)3 and the maximum residue limits (MRL) for pesticides and veterinary drugs established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC). In addition, the following specific provisions apply: For caviar obtained from ovulated eggs, the treatment of the fish (e.g. with hormones) and the subsequent level of residues in the final product shall be in conformity with the relevant provisions in Section 6.3.2: “Veterinary Drugs” of the Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52-2003)4 (Section 6 – Aquaculture) in particular regarding the compliance with the MRL and the withdrawal time. 6 Hygiene It is recommended that the product covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969)5 and other relevant Codex codes of practice. The products should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997).6 The product shall not contain any other substance in amounts which may present a hazard to health in accordance with standards established by the CAC. The final product shall be free from any foreign material that poses a threat to human health. -- 4 of 10 -- 3 STANDARD FOR STURGEON CAVIAR (CXS 291-2010) 7 Labelling In addition to the provisions of the Codex general standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985)7 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 Name of the food For the Acipenseridae family, the name of the food shall be “caviar” or “caviar” completed with the usual name (Beluga for Huso huso, Ossetra for Acipenser guldenstaedtii and Acipenser persicus, Sevruga for Acipenser stellatus), in accordance with the law and custom of the country in which the product is sold, in a manner not to mislead the consumer. For sturgeons having no common names, the name may be supplemented with the identification code or the scientific name of the species in accordance with Annex I (Table A1: “Identification codes of sturgeon species”). For hybrids the common name shall be supplemented with the word hybrid, and the parent sturgeon species may be shown according to Annex I (Table A1: “Identification codes of sturgeon species”). For caviar obtained from ovulated eggs, the product name shall be “caviar from ovulated eggs”. The labelling shall be written in such a way as to avoid any risk of misleading consumers on the nature of the product. 7.2 Storage instructions The labelling shall include terms to indicate that the product shall be stored under appropriate time/ temperature conditions. 7.3 Re-packaging In case of re-packaging of the product the facility registration code shall be identified. 7.4 Labelling of non-retail containers Each primary container shall be labelled with the number markings of the lot and the species. The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021).8 8 Sampling, examination and analysis 8.1 Sampling • Sampling of lots for examination of the product shall be in accordance with the General guidelines on sampling (CXG 50-2004).9 A sample unit is the primary container. • Sampling of lots for examination of net weight shall be carried out in accordance with an appropriate sampling plan meeting the criteria established by the CAC. • Sampling of lots for pathogenic microorganisms and parasites shall be in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997). -- 5 of 10 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 8.2 Examination 8.2.1 Sensory examination Samples taken for sensory and physical/chemical examination shall be assessed by person trained in such examination and in accordance with the Guidelines for the sensory evaluation of fish and shellfish in laboratories (CXG 31-1999).10 8.3 Analysis For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999) relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. 9 Definition of defects The sample unit shall be considered as defective when it exhibits any of the properties defined in sections 9.1–9.4. 9.1 Foreign matter The presence in the sample unit of any matter which has not been derived from sturgeon eggs, does not pose a threat to human health, and is readily recognized without magnification; or is present at a level determined by any method including magnification, that indicates non-compliance with good manufacturing practices and sanitation practices. 9.2 Odour and flavour The product affected by persistent and distinct objectionable odour and/or flavour indicative of decomposition, oxidation, or taste of feed (in fish reared in aquaculture), or contamination by foreign substances (such as fuel oil). 9.3 Consistency and condition • The presence of hard cover of caviar grains that is not easily chewable or tenuous. • The breaking up of the outer membranes when attempting to separate the grains. • The presence of broken eggs or fluid. 9.4 Objectionable matter The presence of remnants of membranes and/or secreted fat in finished caviar. 10 Lot acceptance A lot shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this standard when: • The total number of defectives as classified according to Section 9: “Definition of defects” does not exceed the acceptable number of the appropriate sampling plan given in the General guidelines on sampling (CXG 50-2004). • The average net weight of all sample units is not less than the declared weight, provided no individual container is less than 95 percent of the declared weight. • The food additives, contaminants, hygiene and labelling requirements of Section 4: “Food additives”, Section 5: “Contaminants”, Section 6: “Hygiene” and Section 7: “Labelling” are met. -- 6 of 10 -- 5 STANDARD FOR STURGEON CAVIAR (CXS 291-2010) ANNEX I Table A1: Identification codes of sturgeon species Denomination of sturgeon fishes – Scientific names Code Huso huso HUS Huso dauricus DAU Acipenser naccari NAC Acipenser transmontanus TRA Acipenser schrenkii SCH Acipenser sturio STU Acipenser baerii baikalensis BAI Acipenser sinensis SIN Acipenser dabryanus DAB Acipenser persicus PER Acipenser brevirostrum BVI Acipenser fulvescens FUL Acipenser oxyrhynchus OXY Acipenser oxyrhynchus desotoi DES Acipenser gueldenstaedtii GUE Acipenser medirostris MED Acipenser baerii BAE Acipenser micadoi MIK Acipenser stellatus STE Acipenser ruthenus RUT Acipenser nudiventris NUD Pseudoscaphirhynchus fedtschenkoi FED Pseudoscaphirhynchus hermanni HER Pseudoscaphirhynchus kaufmanni KAU Scaphirhynchus platorhynchus PLA -- 7 of 10 -- 6 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD Denomination of sturgeon fishes – Scientific names Code Scaphirhynchus albus suttkusi ALB Scaphirhynchus suttkus SUS Hybrids: female species code x male species code YYY x XXX -- 8 of 10 -- Referenced texts 1 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). 22 General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995). 33 General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed (CXS 193-1995). 44 Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52-2003). 55 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 66 Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria for foods (CXG 21-1997). 77 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 88 General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021). 99 General guidelines on sampling (CXG 50-2004). 10 10 Guidelines for the sensory evaluation of fish and shellfish in laboratories (CXG 31-1999). -- 9 of 10 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for sturgeon caviar. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 291-2010. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/ce0101en Some rights reserved. This work is made axvailable under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 10 of 10 --