CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR PICKLED CUCUMBERS (CUCUMBER PICKLES) CXS 115-1981 CXS 115-1981 ADOPTED 1981 AMENDED 2025 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 14 -- History of the standard 2025 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-eighth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2025, amendments were made in Section 4: “Food additives”. This publication was redesigned and published in 2025. 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, amendments were made in Section 4: “Food additives”. 2022 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-fifth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2022, amendments were made in Section 8.2: “Labelling of non-retail containers”. Amendments made prior to 2022: Amended in 2017 and 2020. Adopted in 1981. -- 2 of 14 -- STANDARD FOR PICKLED CUCUMBERS (CUCUMBER PICKLES) (CXS 115-1981) 1 1 Scope This standard applies to pickled cucumbers (in some countries cucumber pickles) intended for direct consumption which are: i) prepared with cucumbers as the predominant ingredient; ii) prepared from desalted cured cucumbers, fermented naturally or by controlled fermentation, or from fresh cucumbers which are acidulated; or iii) preserved through natural or control fermentation or added acidulants and may be further preserved by pasteurization with heat, by other physical means or by chemical preservatives. In some countries, the word “cucumbers” is associated with large-sized fruit, whereas the word “gherkin” (in French cornichons) refers to small fruit. Irrespective of customary national trade practice, these products are included in this standard. This standard does not cover finely chopped products called relish. 2 Description 2.1 Product definition Picked cucumbers is the product: i) prepared from clean, sound cucumbers of cultivars conforming to the characteristics of Cucumis sativus L.; ii) that may or may not be peeled and may or may not have seeds removed; iii) packed with or without a suitable liquid packing medium and seasoning ingredients appropriate to the product; and iv) is preserved in an appropriate manner before or after the container is closed – such preservation to include acidulation to a pH of 4.6 or less either by natural or controlled fermentation or addition of a vinegar or an edible acid, and may also include heat pasteurization, refrigeration or a chemical preservative. 2.2 Types and kinds of pack 2.2.1 Fresh pack type Prepared from fresh, uncured and unfermented cucumbers. 2.2.2 Cured type Prepared from cucumbers which have been cured in salt brine or in other suitable curing solution with or without natural or controlled fermentation. Such salt stock may be sufficiently desalted, if necessary, during preparation for processing. -- 3 of 14 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 2.2.3 Subtypes Analytical characteristics of the subtype are determined on the packing medium after equalization. Subtype Characterizing flavour Prepared from ________ type Total acidity (as acetic acid) Salt (NaC1) Salt-free soluble solids a) Dill Dill herb and/ Dill herb and/or oil of dill Fresh pack or cured types 0.4% to 2.0% 1.0% to 4.5% - b) “____” (name of herb) Herb and oils thereof other than dill herb and/or oil of dill - c) Sour Pronounced sour 0.7% to 3.5% 1.0% to 5.0% - d) Sweet-sour Moderately sweet-sour 0.5% to 2.0% 0.5% to 3.0% 1.5% to less than 14% e) Sweet Pronounced sweet 0.5% to 2.5% 14.0% minimum f) Mustard Mustard sauce, mustard seed and/or oil of mustard 0.5% to 3.0% 1.0% to 3.0% - g) Salt sour Pronounced salty 0.5% to 3.5% 5.0% to 10% - h) Mild Neither sweet nor sour 0.4% to 0.7% 1.0% to 3.5% - i) Hot Pronounced pepper 0.5% to 3.0% 1.0% to 3.0% - 2.3 Styles The product shall be presented in one of the following styles: i) whole: cucumbers with a maximum diameter of 54 mm. In containers larger than 4 litres, the cucumbers may have a maximum diameter of 65 mm. Whole cucumbers of this style may be designated as “gherkin” when they are not larger than 27 mm in diameter; ii) whole curved: whole cucumbers with a maximum diameter of 54 mm and curved at least 35°; iii) halves: cucumbers divided lengthwise into halves; iv) finger cut, sliced lengthwise or spears: cucumbers cut lengthwise into sections of approximately equal size; v) ring cut or chunks: cucumbers cut at right angles to the longitudinal axis having a thickness of 10 to 40 mm and a maximum diameter of 54 mm; vi) slices or cross cuts or chips: cucumbers cut at right angles to the longitudinal axis having a thickness of not more than 10 mm and a maximum diameter of 54 mm; and vii) strips (“Asier”): large cucumbers, peeled, divided lengthwise. The prepared halves are cut at a right angle to the longitudinal direction into strips of approximately 10 mm width. -- 4 of 14 -- STANDARD FOR PICKLED CUCUMBERS (CUCUMBER PICKLES) (CXS 115-1981) 3 2.4 Other styles Any other presentation of the product shall be permitted provided that the product: i) is sufficiently distinctive from other forms of presentation laid down in this standard; ii) meets all relevant requirements of this standard, including requirements relating to limitations on defects, drained weight, and any other requirements in this standard which are applicable to that style in the standard which most closely resembles the style or styles intended to be provided for under this provision; and iii) is adequately described on the label to avoid confusing or misleading the consumer. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Permitted ingredients • cucumbers as specified in Section 1: “Scope”, and Section 2: “Description”; • water; • vinegar; • salt (sodium chloride); • vegetable oils; • nutritive carbohydrate sweeteners; • paprika; • herbs; • spices; • condiments; and • vegetables (shall not exceed 5 percent of the total weight of the product, except for the subtype mustard, which may contain no more than 30 percent). 3.2 Quality criteria 3.2.1 Colour The cucumbers shall have normal colour characteristics typical of the variety, type of pack and style. 3.2.2 Texture The cucumbers shall be reasonably firm, crisp and practically free from shrivelled, soft and flabby units, and reasonably free from very large seeds. 3.2.3 Flavour The cucumbers shall have a good flavour typical of the type of pack and in consideration of any characterizing flavouring or special ingredients used. -- 5 of 14 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3.2.4 Size uniformity a) Whole style; spears or sliced lengthwise Eighty (80) percent or more, by count, of the cucumbers shall meet the following requirements: length: the length of the longest unit shall not exceed that of the shortest unit by more than 50 percent; and diameter: the diameter of the largest unit shall not exceed that of the smallest unit by more than 50 percent. These requirements do not apply to cucumbers packed in containers of over 4 litres. b) Ring cut; slices; cross cuts Eighty (80) percent or more by weight of units having the most uniform size meet the following requirement for individual containers or sample units: Diameter: the diameter of the largest unit shall not exceed that of the smallest unit by more than 50 percent. 3.2.5 Definition of defects i) Curved cucumbers: means whole cucumbers that are curved at an angle of 35o when measured as illustrated in Annex I (Figure A1). ii) Misshaped cucumbers: means whole cucumbers, nubbins, and other deformed cucumbers as illustrated in Annex I (Figure A2 ). iii) Blemished: means affected to a degree that materially detracts from appearance and edibility by discolouration, scars, scratches, skin breaks or other similar imperfections. iv) Mechanical damage: means crushed or broken units. v) Stem: means any stalk longer than 15 mm. vi) Poor texture: excessively shrivelled, very soft or flabby or units with very large seeds. vii) Off colour: units that vary markedly from the colour typical of the variety and type of pack. viii) Hollow centres: whole cucumbers in which the internal cavity is large, or ring cuts and slices in which a substantial portion of the centre is missing. ix) Grit, sand or silt: means any mineral impurities, whether in the liquid packing medium or imbedded in the skin or flesh of the cucumbers that affect the edibility. -- 6 of 14 -- STANDARD FOR PICKLED CUCUMBERS (CUCUMBER PICKLES) (CXS 115-1981) 5 3.2.6 Allowances for defects Maximum limit (No. of units) Defect Whole curved whole Halves finger cut or spears a) Curved (except curved style) b) Misshapen c) Blemished d) Mechanical damage e) Stem f) Poor texture g) Off colour h) Hollow centre Maximum allowable total a) through h) 3 2 3 2 3 1 1 1 ___ 7 2 1 3 3 2 3 2 - ____ 11 Defect Maximum limit in g a) Blemished b) Mechanical damage c) Poor texture d) Off colour e) Hollow centre f) Stems Maximum allowable total a) through e) 15 30 10 10 30 2 each _______ 75 g 3.2.7 Mineral impurities All styles and types, except for cucumbers that are peeled not more than 0.08 percent m/m. 3.3 Classification of defectives A container that fails to meet the applicable quality requirements as set out in Section 3.2: “Quality criteria”, shall be considered defective. 3.4 Acceptance A lot will be considered as meeting requirements for quality criteria when the number of defectives as defined in Section 3.3: “Classification of defectives”, does not exceed the acceptance number (c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an acceptable quality limit (AQL) of 6.5 (see relevant Codex texts on methods of analysis and sampling). -- 7 of 14 -- 6 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 4 Food additives 4.1 Solubilizing and dispersing agents Maximum level Polysorbate 80 (polyoxyethylene 20 sorbitan monooleate) 500 mg/kg singly or in combination Xanthan gum Gum arabic Alginate (Ca, NH4 , Na, K) Propylene glycol alginate Carrageenan 4.2 Firming agents Calcium chloride, lactate and gluconate 250 mg/kg singly or in combination 4.3 Preservatives Sulphur dioxide (as a carryover from raw product) 50 mg/kg Carrageenan 1 000 mg/kg singly or in combination Potassium sorbate -- 8 of 14 -- STANDARD FOR PICKLED CUCUMBERS (CUCUMBER PICKLES) (CXS 115-1981) 7 4.4 Colouring matters 101(i) Riboflavin, synthetic good manufacturing practices (GMP) 101(ii) Riboflavin 5’-phosphate, sodium 101(iii) Riboflavin from Bacillus subtilis 101(iv) Riboflavin from Ashbya gossypii Fast green FCF 300 mg/kg singly or in combination Chlorophyll copper complex Tartrazine Annatto extract Turmeric Sunset yellow FCF 160a(i), 160a(iii), 160a(iv) Beta-carotenes 5 mg/kg, expressed as beta-carotene, singly or in combination: beta-crotenes (beta-carotenes, synthetic (INS 160a(i)), beta- carotenes, Blakeslea trispora (INS 160a(iii)), beta-carotene-rich extract from Dunaliella salina (INS 160a(iv)) and beta-carotenes, vegetable (INS 160a(ii)) 160a(ii) Carotenes, beta-, vegetable Paprika extract 300 mg/kg singly or in combination Brilliant blue FCF Caramel, plain Caramel (ammonium sulphite treated) 4.5 Thickening agents (in mustard type only) Guar gum Gum arabic Limited by good manufacturing practices (GMP) Carob bean (Locust bean) gum Tamarind seed polysaccharide -- 9 of 14 -- 8 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 4.6 Acidifiers Acetic acid Lactic acid Limited by GMP Malic acid Citric acid 4.7 Flavourings Natural and synthetic flavourings Limited by GMP 5 Contaminants Tin (Sn) 250 mg/kg, calculated as Sn Lead (Pb) 1 mg/kg 6 Hygiene It is recommended that the product covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),1 and other codes of practice recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission which are relevant to this product. To the extent possible in GMP, the product shall be free from objectionable matter. When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination, the product: • shall be free from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health; • shall be free from parasites which may represent a hazard to health; and • shall not contain any substance originating from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. 7 Weights and measures 7.1 Fill of container 7.1.1 Minimum fill (pickles plus packing medium) The containers shall be well filled with cucumbers, and the product (including packing medium) shall occupy -- 10 of 14 -- STANDARD FOR PICKLED CUCUMBERS (CUCUMBER PICKLES) (CXS 115-1981) 9 not less than 90 percent of the water capacity of the container. The water capacity of the container is the volume of distilled water at 20 °C which the sealed container will hold when completely filled. 7.1.2 Minimum volume fill for whole and whole curved styles The cucumber ingredient shall occupy not less than 55 percent for cured type and 53 percent for fresh pack type of the total capacity (volume) of the container. 7.1.3 Minimum volume fill for all styles except whole The vegetable and fruit ingredient in styles other than whole shall occupy: i) not less than 55 percent in the case of fresh pack; and ii) not less than 57 percent in the case of cured, of the total capacity (volume) of the container. 7.2 Acceptance The requirements for fill of container (as specified in Section 7.1: “Fill of container”) shall be deemed to be complied with when the average from all containers is not less than the minimum required, provided that there is no unreasonable shortage in individual containers. 8 Labelling In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),2 the following specific provisions apply: 8.1 Name of the food The name of the product is “pickled cucumbers”, “cucumber pickles”, “pickles” or “gherkins”. The following shall be included in close proximity to the name of the product: i) the type of pack, e.g. “fresh pack” or “cured pack”; ii) the style of pack and the subtype, including the name of the herb in relation to subtype in Section 2.2.3 (b); iii) the subtype “dill” which may be declared “natural dill” or “genuine dill” when the cucumbers are fermented naturally in a low salt concentration brine; and iv) in whole style, the approximate count range in containers larger than 4 litres. If the product is produced in accordance with the other styles provision (Section 2.4: “Other styles”), the label shall contain in close proximity to the name of the product such additional words or phrases that will avoid misleading or confusing the consumer. 8.2 Labelling of non-retail containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021).3 -- 11 of 14 -- 10 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 9 Methods of analysis and sampling For checking compliance with this standard, the methods