General standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed CXS 193-1995 Adopted in 1995, last amended in 2025 -- 1 of 86 -- CXS 193-1995 2 History of this standard Amendment 2025 Following decisions taken at the Forty-eighth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2025, maximum levels of lead were added for dried bark and dried culinary herbs. The maximum levels for saxitoxin group, okadaic acid group, domoic acid group, brevetoxin group, and azaspiracid group in the Standard for live and raw bivalve molluscs (CXS 292-2008) were also copied into this standard to ensure the Standard remains the single authoritative reference for safe levels of contaminants in food and feed. Annex X: “Scientific justification for the guideline levels for radionuclides in foods contaminated following a nuclear or radiological emergency”, was amended to delete outdated information. Amendment 2024 Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, maximum levels of lead were added for dried aril, dried floral parts, dried fruits and berries, dried paprika and sumac, dried Sichuan pepper and star anise, dried rhizomes and roots, dried seeds, dried celery seeds and quinoa, and the maximum level of cadmium in quinoa. Annex IX Sampling plan for methylmercury contamination in fish was added to support the application of the related maximum levels. Amendments and revisions prior to 2024: Amended in 2010, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2021, 2022 and 2023. Revised in 1997, 2006, 2008 and 2009. -- 2 of 86 -- CXS 193-1995 3 1. Scope This standard contains the main principles which are recommended by the Codex Alimentarius in dealing with contaminants and toxins in food and feed and lists the maximum levels (MLs) and associated sampling plans of contaminants and natural toxicants in food and feed which are recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) to be applied to commodities moving in international trade. This standard includes only MLs of contaminants and natural toxicants in feed in cases where the contaminant in feed can be transferred to food of animal origin and can be relevant for public health. 2. Definition of terms 2.1 General The definitions for the purpose of the Codex Alimentarius, as mentioned in the Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission,1 are applicable to this standard and only the most important ones are repeated here. Some new definitions are introduced, where this seems warranted to obtain optimal clarity. When reference is made to foods, this also applies to animal feed in those cases where this is appropriate. 2.2 Contaminant Codex Alimentarius defines a contaminant as follows: “Any substance not intentionally added to food or feed for food-producing animals, which is present in such food or feed as a result of the production (including operations carried out in crop husbandry, animal husbandry, and veterinary medicine), manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food or feed, or as a result of environmental contamination. The term does not include insect fragments, rodent hairs and other extraneous matter”. This standard applies to any substance that meets the terms of the Codex definition for a contaminant, including contaminants in feed for food-producing animals, except: 1) Contaminants having only food and feed quality significance (e.g. copper) but no public health significance in the food(s) given that the standards elaborated within the Codex Committee on Contaminants in Foods (CCCF) have the objective to protect public health. 2) Pesticide residues, as defined by the Codex definition, that are within the terms of reference of the Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues (CCPR). 3) Residues of veterinary drugs, as defined by the Codex definition, and residues of feed additives,* that are within the terms of reference of the Codex Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods (CCRVDF). 4) Microbial toxins, such as botulinum toxin and staphylococcus enterotoxin, and microorganisms that are within the terms of reference of the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene (CCFH). 5) Residues of processing aids that are within the terms of reference of the Codex Committee on Food Additives (CCFA).** (*) Feed additives as defined in the Code of practice on good animal feeding (CXC 54-2004):2 “Any intentionally added ingredient not normally consumed as feed by itself, whether or not it has nutritional value, which affects the characteristics of feed or animal products”. Residues of feed additives include the parent compounds and/or their metabolites in any edible portion of the animal product and include residues of associated impurities of the feed additive concerned. (**) Processing aids are any substance or material, not including apparatus or utensils, and not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing of raw materials, foods or its ingredients, to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or processing and which may result in the non-intentional but unavoidable presence of residues or derivatives in the final product. 2.3 Natural toxins included in this standard The Codex's definition of a contaminant implicitly includes naturally occurring toxicants, including toxic metabolites of certain microfungi that are not intentionally added to food and feed (mycotoxins). Toxins that are produced by algae and that may be accumulated in edible aquatic organisms such as shellfish (phycotoxins) are also included in this standard. Mycotoxins and phycotoxins are both subclasses of contaminants. -- 3 of 86 -- CXS 193-1995 4 Endogenous natural toxicants, such as solanine in potatoes, that are implicit constituents of food and feed resulting from a genus, species or strain ordinarily producing hazardous levels of a toxic metabolite(s), i.e. phytotoxins, are not generally considered within the scope of this standard. They are, however, within the terms of reference of CCCF and will be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. 2.4 Maximum level and related termsi The Codex maximum level (ML) for a contaminant in a food or feed commodity is the maximum concentration of that substance recommended by the CAC to be legally permitted in that commodity. 3 Principles regarding contaminants in food and feed 3.1 General Contamination of food and feed may pose a risk to human (and/or animal health). Moreover, in some cases, it may also have a negative impact on the quality of the food or feed. Food and feed can become contaminated by various causes and processes. Contaminant levels in food and feed shall be as low as reasonably achievable through best practices such as good agricultural practice (GAP) and good manufacturing practice (GMP) following an appropriate risk assessment. The following actions may serve to prevent or reduce contamination of feed and food.ii  Preventing food and feed contamination at the source, e.g. by reducing environmental pollution.  Applying appropriate technology control measure(s) in food and feed production, manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding.  Applying measures aimed at decontamination of contaminated feed or food and measures to prevent contaminated feed or food to be marketed for consumption. To ensure that adequate action is taken to reduce contamination of food and feed, a code of practice shall be elaborated comprising source-related measures and GMP as well as GAP in relation to the specific contamination problem. The degree of contamination of food and feed and the effect of actions to reduce contamination shall be assessed by monitoring, survey programmes and more specialized research programmes, where necessary. When there are indications that health hazards may be involved with consumption of food that is contaminated, it is necessary that a risk assessment be undertaken. When health concerns can be substantiated, a risk management measure must be applied, based on a thorough evaluation of the situation and consideration of a range of risk management options. Depending on the assessment of the problems and the possible solutions, it may be necessary to establish MLs or other measures to control the contamination of food and feed. In special cases, specific advice on dietary recommendations may also have to be considered to complement other regulatory measures, when the measures are not sufficiently adequate to protect public health and safety. National measures regarding food and feed contamination should avoid the creation of unnecessary barriers to international trade in food and feed commodities. The purpose of this standard is to provide guidance about possible approaches to eliminate or reduce the contamination problem and to promote international harmonization through recommendations, which in turn may prevent trade barriers and disputes. For all contaminants, which may be present in more than one feed or food item, a broad approach shall be applied, considering all relevant information that is available, for the assessing of risks and for developing recommendations and control measures, including the setting of MLs. i For the contaminants radionuclides, acrylonitrile and vinylchloride monomer a Codex guideline level (GL) has been established. A Codex guideline level (GL) is the maximum level of a substance in a food or feed commodity which is recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) to be acceptable for commodities moving in international trade. When the GL is exceeded, governments should decide whether and under which circumstances the food should be distributed within their territory or jurisdiction. Because the CAC has decided that the preferred format of a Codex standard in food or feed is a maximum level, the present existing or proposed guideline levels shall be reviewed for their possible conversion to a maximum level after a risk assessment performed by JECFA, if appropriate. ii In addition, reference is made to the Code of practice concerning source directed measures to reduce contamination of food with chemicals (CXC 49-2001) and the Code of practice on good animal feeding (CXC 54-2004). -- 4 of 86 -- CXS 193-1995 5 3.2 Principles for establishing maximum levels in food and feed MLs shall only be set for food in which the contaminant may be found in amounts that are significant for the total exposure of the consumer, taking into consideration the “Policy of the Committee on Contaminants in Foods for exposure assessment of contaminants and toxins in foods or food groups” (Section 4.5: Codex Procedural Manual).1 The MLs shall be set in such a way that the consumer is adequately protected. At the same time, the other legitimate factors need to be considered. This will be performed in accordance with the Working principles for risk analysis for food safety for application by governments (CXG 62-2007).3 The principles of GMP and GAP, as defined by Codex, shall be used. MLs shall be based on sound scientific principles leading to levels, which are acceptable worldwide, so that there is no unjustified barrier to international trade. MLs shall be clearly defined with respect to status and intended use. 3.3 Specific criteria The following criteria should (not preventing the use of other relevant criteria) be considered when developing MLs and/or other measures in connection with this standard (further details about these criteria are given in Annex I). Toxicological information  identification of the toxic substance(s);  metabolism by humans and animals, as appropriate;  toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics, including information on possible carry-over of the toxic substance from feed to edible animal tissue/products;  information about acute and long-term toxicity and other relevant toxicity data; and  integrated toxicological expert advice regarding the acceptability and safety of intake levels of contaminants, including information on any population groups which are especially vulnerable. Analytical data  validated qualitative and quantitative data on representative samples; and  appropriate sampling procedures. Intake data  presence in food of dietary significance for the contaminant;  presence in food that is widely consumed;  presence in feed and feed components;  food intake data for average and most exposed/high consumer groups;  results from total diet studies;  calculated contaminant intake data from food consumption models;  data on intake by susceptible groups; and  data on intake by food-producing animals. Technological considerations  Information about contamination processes, technological possibilities, production and manufacturing practices and economic aspects related to contaminant level management and control. Risk assessment and risk management considerations (see Working principles for risk analysis for food safety for application by governments (CXG 62-2007))  risk management options and considerations;  consideration of possible MLs in food and feed based on the criteria mentioned above; and  consideration of alternative solutions. 4 Format of the General standard for contaminants in food and feed A full description of the format is provided in Annex II. -- 5 of 86 -- CXS 193-1995 6 Annex I Criteria for the establishment of maximum levels in food and feed Introduction In this annex, criteria are mentioned regarding information, which is considered necessary for evaluating contaminant problems in food and feed and for the establishment of maximum levels (MLs). The criteria mentioned here are elaborated in more detail than in Section 3.3 of the preamble. Only those aspects that need further clarification are detailed; however, criteria or aspects that are not specifically detailed here should not be ruled out in the evaluation process. Toxicological information Integrated toxicological expert advice regarding a safe/tolerable intake level of a contaminant is essential when decisions about MLs in foods are considered. A recommendation from the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) regarding the maximum allowable or tolerable intake, based on a full evaluation of an adequate toxicological database, should be the main basis for decisions by Codex members. In urgent cases, it may be possible to rely on less developed evaluations from JECFA or on toxicological expert advice from other international or national bodies. When toxicological information is presented in relation to proposals for MLs for contaminants in food and feed, information about the following aspects is desirable:  identification of the toxic substance(s);  metabolism in humans and animals, as appropriate;  toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics including information on possible carry-over of the contaminant from feed to edible animal tissue/products;  information about acute and long-term toxicity