CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR DEGERMED MAIZE (CORN) MEAL AND MAIZE (CORN) GRITS CXS 155-1985 CXS 155-1985 ADOPTED 1985 AMENDED 2026 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 8 -- History of the standard 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, the Annex was consequentially amended to replace the methods of analysis for the determination of protein and crude fat with a reference to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” which in turn references the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). This publication was reformatted and published in 2026. 2023 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2023, amendments were made in the Annex. Amendments and revisions made prior to 2023: Revised in 1995. Amended in 2019. Adopted in 1985. -- 2 of 8 -- 1 STANDARD FOR DEGERMED MAIZE (CORN) MEAL AND MAIZE (CORN) GRITS (CXS 155-1985) 1 Scope a) This standard applies to degermed maize (corn) meal and to degermed maize (corn) grits for direct human consumption milled from kernels of common maize, Zea mays L. b) This standard does not apply to whole maize (corn) meal, maize (corn) flours, quick grits, hominy grits, selfrising maize (corn) meals, enriched maize (corn) meals, enriched maize (corn) grits, bolted maize (corn) meals, maize (corn) flakes, and alkaline treated maize (corn) products. c) This standard does not apply to maize (corn) meals for use as a brewing adjunct, to maize (corn) meals used for the manufacturing of starch and any industrial use, nor to maize (corn) meal for use as an animal feed. 2 Description a) Degermed maize (corn) meal is the food prepared from fully mature, sound, degermed kernels of maize (corn), Zea mays L., cleaned from impurities, mould, seeds of weeds and other cereals by a grinding process in which the grain is comminuted to a suitable degree of fineness and from which the bran and germ are removed. In its preparation, coarse particles of the ground maize kernel may be separated, reground and recombined with all of the material from which they were separated. b) Degermed maize (corn) grits is the food prepared from fully mature, sound, degermed, kernels of maize (corn), Zea mays L., cleaned from impurities, mould, seeds of weeds and other cereals, by a grinding process in which the grain is comminuted to a suitable degree of fineness and from which the bran and germ are almost completely removed. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Quality factors – general a) Degermed maize meal and degermed maize grits shall be safe and suitable for human consumption. b) Degermed maize meal and degermed maize grits shall be free from abnormal flavours, odours, and living insects. c) Degermed maize meal and degermed maize grits shall be free from filth (impurities of animal origin, including dead insects) in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. 3.2 Quality factors – specific 3.2.1 Moisture content 15 percent m/m max. Lower moisture limits should be required for certain destinations in relation to the climate, duration of transport and storage. -- 3 of 8 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 4 Contaminants 4.1 Heavy metals Degermed maize (corn) meal and maize (corn) grits shall be free from heavy metals in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. 4.2 Pesticide residues Degermed maize (corn) meal and maize (corn) grits shall comply with those maximum residue limits established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) for this commodity. 4.3 Mycotoxins Degermed maize (corn) meal and maize (corn) grits shall comply with those maximum mycotoxin limits established by the CAC for this commodity. 5 Hygiene a) It is recommended that the product covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969)1 and other codes of practice recommended by the CAC which are relevant to this product. b) To the extent possible in good manufacturing practice, the product shall be free from objectionable matter. When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination, the product: • shall be free from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health; • shall be free from parasites which may represent a hazard to health; and • shall not contain any substance originating from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. 6 Packaging a) Degermed maize (corn) meal and maize (corn) grits shall be packaged in containers which will safeguard the hygienic, nutritional, technological, and organoleptic qualities of the product. b) The containers, including packaging material, shall be made of substances which are safe and suitable for their intended use. They should not impart any toxic substance or undesirable odour or flavour to the product. c) When the product is packaged in sacks, these must be clean, sturdy and strongly sewn or sealed. -- 4 of 8 -- 3 STANDARD FOR DEGERMED MAIZE (CORN) MEAL AND MAIZE (CORN) GRITS (CXS 155-1985) 7 Labelling In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),2 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 Name of the product The name of the product to be shown on the label shall be “degermed maize (corn) meal”, or “maize (corn) grits”. 7.2 Labelling of non-retail containers Information for non-retail containers shall either be given on the container or in accompanying documents, except that the name of the product, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer shall appear on the container. However, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer may be replaced by an identification mark, provided that such a mark is clearly identifiable with the accompanying documents. 8 Methods of analysis and sampling For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)3 relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. -- 5 of 8 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD ANNEX In those instances where more than one factor limit and/or method of analysis is given, we strongly recommend that users specify the appropriate limit and method of analysis. Factor/description Limit Method of analysis Ash Max: 1% on a dry weight basis Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Protein (N x 6.25) Min: 7% on a dry weight basis Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Crude fat Max: 2.25% on a dry weight basis Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” Granularity • degermed maize meal • degermed maize grits 95% or more shall pass through a 0.85 sieve; – and – 45% or more shall pass through a 0.71 mm sieve; – and – 25% or less shall pass through a 0.210 sieve 95% or more through a 2.00 mm sieve; – and – 20% or less through a 0.71 mm sieve Refer to Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” -- 6 of 8 -- 5 STANDARD FOR DEGERMED MAIZE (CORN) MEAL AND MAIZE (CORN) GRITS (CXS 155-1985) REFERENCED TEXTS 1 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 2 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 3 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). -- 7 of 8 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for degermed maize (corn) meal and maize (corn) grits. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 155-1985. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/ce0343en Some rights reserved. This work is made axvailable under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 8 of 8 --