CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR CANNED RASPBERRIES CXS 60-1981 CXS 60-1981 ADOPTED 1981 AMENDED 2026 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 10 -- History of the standard 2026 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-ninth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2026, Section 3: “Food additives” was amended to align with the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995). 2025 Corrigendum A correction was made to Section 2.1: “Packing media”, where an incorrect footnote: “i: See Appendix to Part 1” was removed. This standard does not include a Part 1 or an appendix at this time. 2023 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2023, the wording in Section 8: “Methods of analysis and sampling” was amended. 2022 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-fifth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022, amendments were made in Section 7.2: "Labelling of non-retail containers". Adopted 1981 (formerly CAC/RS 60-1972). -- 2 of 10 -- 1 STANDARD FOR CANNED RASPBERRIES (CXS 60-1981) 1 Description 1.1 Product definition This standard deals with canned raspberries which is the product: a) prepared from raspberry varieties conforming to the characteristics of the fruit of Rubus idaeus L. or Rubus occidentalis L. which are reasonably whole, reasonably sound ripe fruit, and from which extraneous matter including calices and stems have been removed; b) packed with water or other suitable liquid packing medium; and c) processed by heat in an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage. 1.2 Varietal type Any suitable variety of raspberry may be u s e d . 2 Essential composition and quality factors 2.1 Packing media Canned raspberries may be packed in any one of the following: a) water – in which water is the sole packing medium; b) fruit juice – in which raspberry juice, or any other compatible fruit juice, is the sole packing medium; c) water and fruit juice(s) – in which water and raspberry juice, or water and any other single fruit juice or water and two or more fruit juices, are combined to form the packing medium; d) mixed fruit juices – in which two or more fruit juices, including raspberry, are combined to form the packing medium; e) with sugar(s) – any of the foregoing packing media a) through d) may have one or more of the following sugars added: sucrose, invert sugar syrup, dextrose, dried glucose syrup, glucose syrup. 2.1.1 Classifications of packing media when sugars are added When sugars are added to raspberry juice or other fruit juices, the liquid media shall be not less than 15 oBrix and shall be classified on the basis of the cut-out strength as follows: lightly sweetened (name of fruit) juice – not less than 15 oBrix: or heavily sweetened (name of fruit) juice – not less than 20 oBrix. When sugars are added to water or water and raspberry juice or water and fruit juices the liquid media shall be classified on the basis of the cut-out strength as follows: Basic syrup strengths light syrup not less than 15 oBrix heavy syrup not less than 20 oBrix. -- 3 of 10 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 2.1.2 Optional packing media When not prohibited in the country of sale, the following packing media may be used: slightly sweetened water ) water slightly sweetened ) Not less than 11 oBrix but less than 15 oBrix. extra light syrup ) extra heavy syrup More than 26 oBrix. The cut-out strength of sweetened juice or syrup shall be determined on sample average, but no container may have a Brix value lower than that of the minimum of the next category below, if such there b e . 2.2 Quality criteria 2.2.1 Colour Except for artificially coloured canned raspberries, the raspberries shall have normal colour characteristics for canned raspberries and typical of the variety used. 2.2.2 Flavour Canned raspberries shall have a normal flavour and odour free from flavours or odours foreign to the product. 2.2.3 Texture The raspberries shall have a reasonably uniform texture and shall not be excessively firm nor unreasonably soft. 2.2.4 Defects and allowances Canned raspberries shall be substantially free from defects within the limits set forth as follows: Defects Maximum limits a) Blemished berries 10%m/m of drained raspberries (consisting of berries which are affected by wind rub, insects, disease, or which are deformed to the extent that the appearance or eating quality is materially affected) b) Crushed or broken berries 25% m/m of drained raspberries (consisting of berries in which more than 50% of the drupelets are crushed, broken, detached, or otherwise damaged to the extent that the original conformation is destroyed) Total of the foregoing defects a) and b) 25% m/m of drained raspberries c) Extraneous plant material (based on averages) i) Stalks (stems) or parts thereof, 2 pieces per 100 grams of drained each longer than 3 mm raspberries ii) Leaves, calices, or portions of 2 sq. cm per 100 grams of drained any of these, or other similar raspberries harmless extraneous plant material -- 4 of 10 -- 3 STANDARD FOR CANNED RASPBERRIES (CXS 60-1981) 2.2.5 Classification of defectives A container that fails to meet one or more of the applicable quality requirements, as set out in Section 2.2.1: “Colour” through Section 2.2.4: “Defects and allowances” (except extraneous plant material which is based on an average), shall be considered defective. 2.2.6 Acceptance A lot will be considered as meeting the applicable quality requirements referred to in Section 2.2.5: “Classification of defectives” when: a) for those requirements which are not based on averages, the number of “defectives”, as defined in Section 2.2.5: “Classification of defectives”, does not exceed the acceptance number (c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5 (see relevant Codex texts on methods of analysis and sampling); and b) the requirements which are based on sample averages are complied with. 3 Food additives Maximum level 3.1 Colours Ponceau 4 R (INS 124) - CI 16255 ) 300 mg/kg of the final product 4 Contaminants Lead (Pb) 1 mg/kg Tin (Sn) 250 mg/kg calculated as Sn 5 Hygiene 5.1 It is recommended that the product covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),1 and other codes of practice recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission which are relevant to this product. 5.2 To the extent possible in good manufacturing practice, the product shall be free from objectionable matter. 5.3 When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination, the product: • shall be free from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health; • shall be free from parasites which may represent a hazard to health; and • shall not contain any substance originating from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. -- 5 of 10 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 6 Weights and measures 6.1 Fill of container 6.1.1 Minimum fill The container shall be well filled with raspberries, and the product (including packing medium) shall occupy not less than 90 percent of the water capacity of the container. The water capacity of the container is the volume of distilled water at 20 °C which the sealed container will hold when completely filled. 6.1.2 Classification of defectives A container that fails to meet the requirement for minimum fill (90 percent container capacity) of subsection 5.1.1 shall be considered defective. 6.1.3 Acceptance A lot will be considered as meeting the requirement of Section 6.1.1: “Minimum fill” when the number of defectives, as defined in Section 6.1.2: “Classification of defectives”, does not exceed the acceptance number c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5 (see relevant Codex texts on methods of analysis and sampling). 6.1.4 Minimum drained weight The drained weight of the product shall be not less than 37 percent of the weight of distilled water at 20 °C which the sealed container will hold when completely filled. The requirement for minimum drained weight shall be deemed to be complied with when the average drained weight of all containers examined is not less than the minimum required, provided that there is no unreasonable shortage in individual containers. 7 Labelling In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),2 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 The name of the food a) The name of the product shall be “Raspberries”. b) In the case of raspberries other than red raspberries, the colour of the fruit shall be included as part of the name or in close proximity to the name. c) The packing medium shall be declared as part of the name or in close proximity to the name. i) When the packing medium is composed of water, or water and raspberry juice, or water and one or more fruit juices in which water predominates, the packing medium shall be declared as: “In water” or “Packed in water ”. ii) When the packing medium is composed solely of raspberry juice, or any other single fruit juice, the packing medium shall be declared as: “In raspberry juice” or “In (name of fruit) j u i ce ” . -- 6 of 10 -- 5 STANDARD FOR CANNED RASPBERRIES (CXS 60-1981) iii) When the packing medium is composed of two or more fruit juices, which may include raspberry juice, it shall be declared as: “In (name of fruits) juice” or “In fruit juices” or “In mixed fruit juices”. iv) When sugars are added to raspberry juice or other fruit juices, the packing medium shall be declared as: “Lightly sweetened (name of fruit) j u i ce ” o r “Heavily sweetened (name of fruits) juice(s)” o r “Lightly sweetened fruit juices” or “Heavily sweetened mixed fruit juice(s)” as may be appropriate. v) When sugars are added to water, or water and a single fruit juice (including raspberry juice) or water and two or more fruit juices, the packing medium shall be declared a s : “Light syrup” or “Heavy syrup” or “Water slightly sweetened” or “Slightly sweetened water” or “Extra light syrup” or “Extra heavy syrup” as may be appropriate. vi) When the packing medium contains water and raspberry juice or water and one or more fruit juice(s), in which the fruit juice comprises 50 percent or more by volume of the packing medium, the packing medium shall be designated to indicate the preponderance of such fruit juice, as for example: “Raspberry juice and water” or “(name of fruit) juice(s) and water”. 7.2 Labelling of non-retail containers. The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021).3 8 Methods of analysis and sampling For checking the compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)4 relevant to the provisions in this standard, shall be used. -- 7 of 10 -- 6 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD REFERENCED TEXTS 1 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 2 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 3 General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021). 4 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). -- 8 of 10 -- -- 9 of 10 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for canned raspberries. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 60-1981. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/ce0146en Some rights reserved. This work is made available under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 10 of 10 --