STANDARD FOR CHAYOTES CXS 216-1999 Adopted in 1999. Amended in 2005, 2011. -- 1 of 4 -- CXS 216-1999 2 1. DEFINITION OF PRODUCE This Standard applies to commercial varieties of chayotes grown from Sechium edule (Jacq.) Sw., of the Cucurbitaceae family, to be supplied fresh to the consumer, after preparation and packaging. Chayotes for industrial processing are excluded. 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY 2.1 Minimum Requirements In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, the chayotes must be: - whole; - sound, produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded; - clean, practically free of any visible foreign matter; - practically free of pests affecting the general appearance of the produce; - practically free of damage caused by pests; - free of abnormal external moisture, excluding condensation following removal from cold storage; - free of any foreign smell and/or taste; - firm; - fresh in appearance; - free of damage caused by low temperatures; - practically free of bruising; - free of damage caused by the sun; - free of fibrous flesh; - free of hard spines; - free of visible signs of germination. 2.1.1 The chayotes must have reached an appropriate degree of development and ripeness in accordance with criteria proper to the variety and to the area in which they are grown. The development and condition of the chayotes must be such as to enable them: - to withstand transport and handling; and - to arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 2.2 Classification Chayotes are classified in three classes defined below: 2.2.1 “Extra” Class Chayotes in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. They must be free of defects, with the exception of very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. 2.2.2 Class I Chayotes in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: - slight defects in shape, i.e. lightly marked longitudinal grooves and slight depressions; - slight defects in colouring, not exceeding 25% of the total surface area; - slight skin defects due to scarring, not exceeding a total of 3 cm2. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. -- 2 of 4 -- CXS 216-1999 3 2.2.3 Class II This class includes chayotes which do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes, but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 2.1 above. The following defects, however, may be allowed, provided the chayotes retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation: - defects in shape, i.e. lightly marked longitudinal grooves and slight depressions; - defects in colouring, not exceeding 35% of the total surface area; - skin defects due to scarring, not exceeding a total of 5 cm2. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Size is determined by weight or by length, with a minimum weight of 200 g or a minimum length of 12 cm, in accordance with the following table: Size Code Weight (in grams) Length (cm) A 200 - 300 12 - 14 B 301 - 400 15 - 16 C 401 - 500 > 16 D > 500 The difference in weight between individual fruits under size code D may not exceed 150 g. 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES Tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each package for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 Quality Tolerances 4.1.1 “Extra” Class Five percent by number or weight of chayotes not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class I or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent by number or weight of chayotes not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class II or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.3 Class II Ten percent by number or weight of chayotes satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements, with the exception of produce affected by rotting or any other deterioration rendering it unfit for consumption. 4.2 Size Tolerances For all classes, 10% by number or weight of chayotes corresponding to the size immediately above or below that indicated on the package. 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 Uniformity The contents of each package must be uniform and contain only chayotes of the same variety and/or commercial type, origin, quality, colour and size. The visible part of the contents of the package must be representative of the entire contents. 5.2 Packaging Chayotes must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new1, clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. 1 For the purposes of this Standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality. -- 3 of 4 -- CXS 216-1999 4 Chayotes shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 44-1995). 5.2.1 Description of Containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of the chayotes. Packages must be free of all foreign matter and smell. 6. MARKING OR LABELLING 6.1 Consumer Packages In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CXS 1-1985), the following specific provisions apply: 6.1.1 Nature of Produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the name of the produce and may be labelled as to name of the variety. 6.2 Non-retail Containers Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. 6.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher. Identification code (optional)2. 6.2.2 Nature of Produce Name of the produce if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety or commercial type (optional). 6.2.3 Origin of Produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional or local place name. 6.2.4 Commercial Identification - Class; - Size (size code or minimum and maximum weight or length in grams or mm, respectively); - Net weight (optional). 6.2.5 Official Inspection Mark (optional) 7. CONTAMINANTS 7.1 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193-1995). 7.2 The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 8. HYGIENE 8.1 It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this Standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969), Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 53-2003), and other relevant Codex texts such as Codes of Hygienic Practice and Codes of Practice. 8.2 The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Related to Foods (CXG 21-1997). 2 The national legislation of a number of countries requires the explicit declaration of the name and address. However, in the case where a code mark is used, the reference “packer and/or dispatcher (or equivalent abbreviations)” has to be indicated in close connection with the code mark. -- 4 of 4 --