STANDARD FOR TABLE OLIVES CXS 66-1981 Adopted in 1981. Revised in 1987, 2013. Amended in 2022, 2023 and 2024. -- 1 of 14 -- CXS 66-1981 2 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2024, amendments were made in Section 4. Food additives. 2023 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2023, amendments were made in Section 9. Methods of analysis and sampling. 2022 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-fifth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022, amendments were made in Section 8.2 Labelling of non-retail containers. -- 2 of 14 -- CXS 66-1981 3 1. SCOPE This standard applies to the fruit of the cultivated olive tree (Olea europaea L.), as defined in Section 2, which has been suitably treated or processed, and which is offered for direct consumption as table olives, including for catering purposes or olives packed in bulk containers which are intended for repacking into consumer size containers. It does not apply to the product when indicated as being intended for further processing. 2. DESCRIPTION 2.1 Product definition Table olives are the product: (a) prepared from the sound fruits of varieties of the cultivated olive tree (Olea europaea L.) having reached appropriate degree of development for processing that are chosen for their production of olives whose volume, shape, flesh-to-stone ratio, fine flesh, taste, firmness and ease of detachment from the stone make them particularly suitable for processing; (b) treated to remove its bitterness and preserved by natural fermentation, and/or by heat treatment, and/or by other means so as to prevent spoilage and to ensure product stability in appropriate storage conditions with or without the addition of preservatives; and (c) packed with or without a suitable liquid packing medium in accordance with Section 3.1.3. 2.2 Product designation Table olives are classified in one of the following olive types and trade preparations/treatments. 2.2.1 Types of olives Table olives are classified in one of the following types according to the degree of ripeness of the fresh fruits: (a) Green olives: fruits harvested during the ripening period, prior to colouring and when they have reached normal size. (b) Olives turning colour: fruits harvested before the stage of complete ripeness is attained, at colour change. (c) Black olives: fruits harvested when fully ripe or slightly before full ripeness is reached. 2.2.2 Trade preparations Olives shall undergo the following trade preparations and/or treatments: (a) Treated olives: green olives, olives turning colour or black olives that have undergone alkaline treatment: (a-1) treated green olives; (a-2) treated olives turning colour; (a-3) treated black olives; and (a-4) green ripe olives.i (b) Natural olives: green olives, olives turning colour or black olives placed directly in brine in which they undergo complete or partial fermentation, preserved or not by the addition of acidifying agents: (b-1) natural green olives; (b-2) natural olives turning colour; and (b-3) natural black olives. i Olives ranging in colour from yellowish green or other greenish cast which may be mottled. The olives are treated to remove bitterness, sufficiently processed by heat, in hermetically-sealed containers, are not oxidized and not treated with acidifying agents. -- 3 of 14 -- CXS 66-1981 4 (c) Dehydrated and/or shrivelled olives: green olives, olives turning colour or black olives that have undergone or not mild alkaline treatment, preserved in brine or partially dehydrated in dry salt and/or by heating or by any other technological process: (c-1) dehydrated and/or shrivelled green olives; (c-2) dehydrated and/or shrivelled olives turning colour; and (c-3) dehydrated and/or shrivelled black olives. (d) Olives darkened by oxidation: Green olives or olives turning colour preserved in brine, fermented or not and darkened by oxidation with or without alkaline medium. They shall be a uniform brown to black colour. Olives darkened by oxidation shall be preserved in hermetically-sealed containers and subjected to heat sterilization. (d-1) Black olives. (e) Specialities: olives may be prepared by means distinct from, or additional to, those set forth above. Such specialities retain the name “olive” as long as the fruit used complies with the general definitions laid down in this standard. The names used for these specialities shall be sufficiently explicit to prevent any confusion, in purchasers’ or consumers’ minds, as to the origin and nature of the products and, in particular, with respect to the designations laid down in this standard. 2.3 Varietal types Any commercially cultivated variety (cultivar) suitable for processing. 2.4 Styles Olives may be offered in one of the following styles: 2.4.1 Whole olives (a) Whole olives: olives, with or without their stem, which have their natural shape and from which the stone (pit) has not been removed. (b) Cracked olives: whole olives subjected to a process whereby the flesh is opened without breaking the stone (pit) which remains whole and intact inside the fruit. (c) Split olives: whole olives that are split lengthwise by cutting into the skin and part of the flesh. 2.4.2 Stoned (pitted) olives (a) Stoned (pitted) olives: olives from which the stone (pit) has been removed and which basically retain their natural shape. (b) Halved olives: stoned (pitted) or stuffed olives sliced into two approximately equal parts, perpendicularly to the longitudinal axis of the fruit. (c) Quartered olives: stoned (pitted) olives split into four approximately equal parts along and perpendicularly to the major axis of the fruit. (d) Divided olives: stoned (pitted) olives cut lengthwise into more than four approximately equal parts. (e) Sliced olives: stoned (pitted) or stuffed olives sliced into segments of fairly uniform thickness. (f) Chopped or minced olives: small pieces of stoned (pitted) olives of no definite shape and practically devoid (no more than 5 per 100 of such units by weight) of identifiable stem-insertion units as well as of slice fragments. (g) Broken olives: olives broken while being stoned (pitted) or stuffed. They may contain pieces of the stuffing material. 2.4.3 Stuffed olives: stoned (pitted) olives stuffed either with one or more suitable products (pimiento, onion, almond, celery, anchovy, olive, orange or lemon peel, hazelnut, capers, etc.) or with edible pastes. 2.4.4 Salad olives: whole broken or broken-and-stoned (pitted) olives with or without capers, plus stuffing material, where the olives are the most numerous compared with the entire product marketed in this style. 2.4.5 Olives with capers or medley: whole or stoned (pitted) olives, usually small in size, with capers and with or without stuffing, packed with other edible pickled products such as pieces of onion, carrot, celery, pepper and other suitable ingredients, as defined by Section 3.1.2, where the olives are the most numerous compared with the entire product marketed in this style. -- 4 of 14 -- CXS 66-1981 5 2.5 Other styles Any other presentation of the product should be permitted provided that the product: (a) is sufficiently distinctive from other forms of presentation laid down in the standard; (b) meets all relevant requirements of the standard, including requirements relating to limitations on defects, drained weight, and any other requirements which are applicable to that style which most closely resembles the style or styles intended to be provided for under this provision; and (c) is adequately described on the label to avoid confusing or misleading the consumer. 3. ESSENTIAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY FACTORS 3.1 Composition 3.1.1 Basic ingredients Olives as defined in Sections 1 and 2, with or without liquid packing medium. 3.1.2 Other permitted ingredients Other ingredients may be used such as: (a) water; (b) food-grade salts as defined in Standard for food-grade salt (CXS 150-1985);1 (c) vinegar; (d) olive oil as defined in Standard for olive oils and olive pomace oils (CXS 33-1981)2 or other edible vegetable oils as defined in Standard for named vegetable oils (CXS 210-1999);3 (e) sugars as defined by Standard for sugars (CXS 212-1999)4 and/or other foodstuffs with sweetening properties such as honey (Standard for honey [CXS 12-1981]);5 (f) any single or combination of edible material used as an accompaniment or stuffing such as, for example, pimiento, onion, almond, celery, anchovy, capers, or pastes thereof; and (g) spices and aromatic herbs or natural extracts thereof. 3.1.3 Packing media (packing brines) This term applies to solutions of food-grade salts as defined in Standard for food-grade salt dissolved in potable water, with or without the addition of all or some of the ingredients listed under Section 3.1.2. Brine shall be clean, free from foreign matter, have characteristic colour flavour and odour and shall comply with the hygiene rules laid down in Section 6. Fermented olives held in a packing medium may contain microorganisms used for fermentation, notably lactic acid bacteria and yeasts. Physico-chemical characteristics of the packing brine, or the juice from the pulp after osmotic balance, depending on the applied conservation treatment and according to Section 2.1 (b), shall be as follows: Table 1 Type and preparation Minimum sodium chloride content Maximum pH limit Treated olives Natural olives 5.0% 6.0% 4.3 4.3 Pasteurized treated and natural olives GMP 4.3 Dehydrated and/or shrivelled olives 8.0% GMP Darkened by oxidation with alkaline treatment and green ripe olives GMP GMP GMP: Good manufacturing practice -- 5 of 14 -- CXS 66-1981 6 Trade preparations of table olives not complying with the above physico-chemical characteristics should be appropriately processed to ensure that they comply with the general food safety recommendations as set out in Section 6. The presence of propionic acid and its salts may be observed in table olive trade preparations that have undergone fermentation in conformity with good manufacturing practice. 3.2 Quality factors Table olives should have normal colour, flavour, odour and texture characteristic of the finished product. The olives and brine shall be devoid of any microbiological deterioration and extraneous taste and smell caused by anomalous fermentation. Table olives in whole, stoned (pitted) and stuffed styles shall comply with the minimum quality requirements in the second category in the Table 3 of Section 3.2.4. Other styles shall comply with Table 4 in Section 3.2.4. 3.2.1 Trade categories Classification of table olives is optional; however, if classified, the following designations apply: 3.2.1.1 “Extra” or “Fancy” or “A” The high-quality olives endowed to the maximum extent with the characteristics specific to the variety and trade preparation are considered as belonging to this category. Notwithstanding, and providing this does not affect the overall favourable aspect or organoleptic characteristics of each fruit, they may have very slight colour, shape, flesh-firmness or skin defects. Whole, split, stoned (pitted) and stuffed olives of appropriate varieties may be classified in this category. 3.2.1.2 “First”, “1st”, “Choice” or “Select” or “B” This category covers good quality olives with a suitable degree of ripeness and endowed with the characteristics specific to the variety and trade preparation. Providing this does not affect the overall favourable aspect or individual organoleptic characteristics of each fruit, they may have slight colour, shape, skin or flesh- firmness defects. All the types, preparations and styles of table olives may be classified in this category, except for chopped or broken olives. 3.2.1.3 “Second”, “2nd” or “Standard” or “C” This category includes good quality olives which, although they cannot be classified in the two previous categories, comply with the general conditions defined for table olives under this section. 3.2.2 Uniformity of size Table olives shall be uniform in size. If they are size-graded the following scale may be applied. Different scales or size designations may nevertheless be applied according to agreements between the parties concerned. The olives are size-graded by count of the number of fruits per kilogramme as in the table below. Table 2 60/70 101/110 161/180 261/290 71/80 111/120 181/200 291/320 81/90 121/140 201/230 321/350 91/100 141/160 231/260 351/380 381/410* *Above 410, the interval is 50 fruits. Solely where stuffed olives are concerned, as from size 201/220 the interval is 20 fruits up to size 401/420. Size grading may be applied for olives in the whole, stoned (pitted) and stuffed styles. In the case of stoned (pitted) olives or stuffed olives (after removing the stuffing), the size shown shall be the one corresponding to the original whole olive. For the purpose of checking, the number of stoned (pitted) olives in one kilogramme shall be multiplied by a coefficient set by each producing country. -- 6 of 14 -- CXS 66-1981 7 Within each size as defined above, it is stipulated that after having removed from a sample of 100 olives, the olive having the largest horizontal diameter and the olive having the smallest horizontal diameter, the difference between the horizontal diameters of the remaining olives may not exceed 4 mm. Alternatively, the maximum permitted tolerance shall be - 10 percent of over or under sizes for sizes with a 10-fruit interval; - 5 percent of over or under sizes for sizes with a 20-fruit interval; - 2 percent of over or under sizes for sizes with a 30- or more fruit interval. 3.2.3 Definitions of defects (a) Harmless extraneous material: any vegetable matter not injurious to health, nor aesthetically undesirable, for example leaves, separated stems, but not including substances the addition of which has been authorized in the standard. (b) Blemished fruit: olives with marks or stains on the skin that are more than 9 mm2 in surface area and that may or may not penetrate through to the fleshes which singly or in the aggregate, materially affect the appearance or eating quality of the olives. (c) Mutilated fruit: olives damaged by tearing the epicarp affecting the flesh to such an extent that a portion of the mesocarp becomes visible. (d) Broken fruit: olives damaged to such an extent as to affect their normal structure. (e) Shrivelled fruit: olives that are so abnormally wrinkled as to affect their appearance. The slight superficial wrinkles displayed by certain trade preparations shall not be considered a defect. (f) Abnormal texture: olives which are excessively or abnormally flabby or tough in comparison with the trade preparation in question and with the average of a representative sample of the lot. (g) Abnormal colour: olives the colour of which is distinctly different from the characteristic colour o