REGIONAL STANDARD FOR CHANTERELLES (Europe)i CXS 40R-1981 Adopted in 1981. Revised in 2012. Amended in 2022. i Members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in the region of Europe are indicated on the Codex website at https://www.fao.org/fao-who-codexalimentarius. -- 1 of 7 -- CXS 40R-1981 2 Amendments in 2022. The following amendments were made to the text of the standard following decisions taken at the forty-fifth session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022. Page Location Original text Printed text 6 Section 8.1.2 Mixtures In the case of a mixture of chanterelles of distinctly different species, common names of each species should be indicated. If the country of origin or size of each distinctly different species is different, they should be indicated near the name of the species concerned. Section 8.1.2 Origin of produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional, or local place name of the species presented. Section 8.1.3 Mixtures In the case of a mixture of chanterelles of distinctly different species, common names of each species should be indicated. If the country of origin or size of each distinctly different species is different, they should be indicated near the name of the species concerned. 6 Section 8.2 Non-retail containers Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Containers of Foods (CXS 346-2021), each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. 6 Section 8.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher. Identification code (optional) Section 8.2.1 Nature of produce Botanical name of species (optional). 6 Section 8.2.2 Nature of produce Common name of the produce if the contents are not visible from the outside. Botanical name of species (optional). Section 8.2.2 Commercial identification  class; and  size (if sized), expressed as minimum and maximum diameters of the cap in cm. 6 Section 8.2.3 Mixtures In the case of a mixture of chanterelles of distinctly different species, common names of each species should be indicated. If the country of origin or size of each distinctly different species is different, they should be indicated near the name of the species concerned. Section 8.2.3 Official inspection mark (optional) Section 8.2.4 Origin of Produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional or local place name of the species presented. - Section 8.2.5 Commercial Identification  Class;  Size (if sized), expressed as minimum and maximum diameters of the cap in cm;  Net weight (optional). - Section 8.2.6 Official Inspection Mark (optional) - -- 2 of 7 -- CXS 40R-1981 3 1. DEFINITIONii This standard applies to carpophores (fruiting bodies) of species of edible mushrooms of the genera Cantharellus and Craterellus to be supplied fresh to the consumer, chanterelles for industrial processing being excluded. A non-exhaustive list of commercialized chanterelles is presented below. 1.1 Genus Cantharellus Species Common name Commercial type Cantharellus amethysteus (Quél.) Sacc. Amethyst chanterelle Chanterelle Cantharellus cibarius Fr. Chanterelle, Golden chanterelle Chanterelle Cantharellus ferruginascens P.D.Orton None Chanterelle Cantharellus formosus Corner Pacific golden chanterelle Chanterelle Cantharellus lilacinopruinatus Hermitte, Eyssart. & Poumarat None Chanterelle Cantharellus subpruinosus Eyssart. & Buyck None Chanterelle Cantharellus cinereus (Pers.) Fr. Ashen chanterelle Chanterelle 1.2 Genus Craterellus Species Common name Commercial type Craterellus lutescens (Fr.) Fr. Yellow foot, Yellow-stemmed foot Chanterelle Craterellus tubaeformis (Fr.) Quél. Trumpet chanterelle, Autumn chanterelle Chanterelle Craterellus cornucopioides (L.) Pers. Horn of plenty, Trumpet of death, Black chanterelle Chanterelle 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY The purpose of the standard is to define the quality requirements for chanterelles at the export-control stage after preparation and packaging. However, if applied at stages following export, products may show in relation to the requirements of the standard:  a slight lack of freshness and turgidity; and  for products graded in classes other than the extra class, a slight deterioration due to their development and their tendency to perish. The holder/seller of products may not display such products or offer them for sale or deliver or market them in any manner other than in conformity with this standard. The holder/seller shall be responsible for observing such conformity. ii All information on Latin names is taken from Index Fungorum. See www.indexfungorum.org -- 3 of 7 -- CXS 40R-1981 4 2.1 Minimum requirements In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, the chanterelles must be:  intact; the stalk must be attached to the cap; the earth-soiled foot can be cut;  sound; produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded;  clean; practically free of any visible foreign matter;  positively identifiable;  firm;  fresh in appearance;  practically free from pests;  practically free from damage caused by pests;  free of abnormal external moisture; and  free of any foreign smell and/or taste. The development and condition of the chanterelles must be such as to enable them to:  withstand transportation and handling; and  arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 2.2 Classification Chanterelles are classified in three classes, as defined below: 2.2.1 Extra class Chanterelles in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the species. They must be free from defects, with the exception of very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. 2.2.2 Class I Chanterelles in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the species. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package:  slight superficial defects;  slight defects in colouring; and  slight pest damage. 2.2.3 Class II This class includes chanterelles that do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes but satisfy the minimum requirements specified above. The following defects may be allowed, provided the chanterelles retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation:  superficial defects;  defects in colouring;  pest damage; and  damage, including the removal of blemished parts. -- 4 of 7 -- CXS 40R-1981 5 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Size is determined by the maximum diameter of the cap and the height. The minimum size for chanterelles shall be 1 cm in height. Uniformity in size shall be optional. If sized, the range in size between caps in the same package shall not exceed 5 cm. 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES At all marketing stages, tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each lot for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 Quality tolerances 4.1.1 Extra class A total tolerance of 5 percent, by weight, of chanterelles not satisfying the requirements of the class but meeting those of class I is allowed. Within this tolerance not more than 0.5 percent in total may consist of produce satisfying the requirements of class II quality. 4.1.2 Class I A total tolerance of 10 percent, by weight, of chanterelles not satisfying the requirements of the class but meeting those of class II is allowed. Within this tolerance, not more than 1 percent in total may consist of produce satisfying neither the requirements of class II quality nor the minimum requirements, or of produce affected by decay. In addition, a tolerance of 5 percent by weight of trimmed chanterelles is allowed. 4.1.3 Class II A total tolerance of 10 per cent, by weight, of chanterelles satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements is allowed. Within this tolerance not more than 2 percent in total may consist of produce affected by decay. 4.2 Size tolerances For all classes (if sized): a tolerance of 10 percent, by weight, of chanterelles not satisfying the requirements as regards sizing is allowed. 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 Uniformity The contents of each package must be uniform and contain only chanterelles of the same origin, quality, species and size (if sized). However, a mixture of distinctly different species of chanterelles may be packed together in a consumer package, provided they are separated (by means of compartments, for example) and are uniform in quality and, for each species concerned, in origin and size (if sized). The visible part of the contents of the package must be representative of the entire contents. 5.2 Packaging Chanterelles must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new,iii clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. Chanterelles shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 44-1995).1 5.2.1 Description of containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation, and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping, and preserving of the chanterelles. Packages must be free of all foreign matter and smell. iii For the purposes of this standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality. -- 5 of 7 -- CXS 40R-1981 6 6. CONTAMINANTS 6.1 The produce covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193-1995).2 6.2 The produce covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission for this commodity. 7. HYGIENE 7.1 It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969),3 the Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 53-2003)4 and other relevant Codex Alimentarius texts such as codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. 7.2 The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods (CXG 21-1997).5 8. MARKING OR LABELLING 8.1 Consumer packages In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods (CXS 1- 1985),6 the following specific provisions apply: 8.1.1 Nature of produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the common name of the produce. 8.1.2 Origin of produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional, or local place name of the species presented. 8.1.3 Mixtures In the case of a mixture of chanterelles of distinctly different species, common names of each species should be indicated. If the country of origin or size of each distinctly different species is different, they should be indicated near the name of the species concerned. 8.2 Non-retail containers In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Containers of Foods (CXS 346-2021),7 each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. 8.2.1 Nature of produce Botanical name of species (optional). 8.2.2 Commercial identification  class; and  size (if sized), expressed as minimum and maximum diameters of the cap in cm. 8.2.3 Official inspection mark (optional) -- 6 of 7 -- CXS 40R-1981 7 NOTES 1 FAO and WHO. 1995. Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 44-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 2 FAO and WHO. 1995. General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 193-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 3 FAO and WHO. 1969. General Principles of Food Hygiene. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 1-1969. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 4 FAO and WHO. 2003. Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No CXC 53-2003. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 5 FAO and WHO. 1997. Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods. Codex Alimentarius Guideline, No. CXG 21-1997. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 6 FAO and WHO. 1985.General Standard for the Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 1-1985. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 7 FAO and WHO. 2021. General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Containers of Foods. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 346-2021. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. -- 7 of 7 --