STANDARD FOR CERTAIN PULSES CXS 171-1989 Adopted in 1989. Amended in 2012, 2019. -- 1 of 5 -- CXS 171-1989 2 1. SCOPE This standard applies to the whole, shelled or split pulses defined below, which are intended for direct human consumption. The standard does not apply to pulses intended for factory grading and packaging, industrial processing, or to those pulses intended for use in the feeding of animals. It does not apply to fragmented pulses when sold as such, or to other legumes for which separate standards may be elaborated. 2. DESCRIPTION 2.1 Product definition Pulses are dry seeds of leguminous plants which are distinguished from leguminous oil seeds by their low-fat content. The pulses covered by this standard are the following: – beans of Phaseolus spp. (except Phaseolus mungo L. syn. Vigna mungo (L.) Hepper and Phaseolus aureus Roxb. syn. Phaseolus radiatur L., Vigna radiata (L.) Wilczek); – lentils of Lens culinaris Medic. Syn. Lens esculenta Moench.; – peas of Pisum sativum L.; – chick peas of Cicer arientinum L.; – field beans of Vicia faba L.; and – cow peas of Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp., syn. Vigna sesquipedalis Fruhw., Vigna sinensis (L.) Savi exd Hassk. 3. ESSENTIAL COMPOSITION AND QUALITY FACTORS 3.1 Quality factors – general 3.1.1 Pulses shall be safe and suitable for human consumption. 3.1.2 Pulses shall be free from abnormal flavour, odours, and living insects. 3.1.3 Pulses shall be free from filth (impurities of animal origin, including dead insects) in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. 3.2 Quality factors – specific 3.2.1 Moisture content 3.2.1.1 Two maximum moisture levels are provided to meet different climatic conditions and marketing practices. Lower values in the first column are suggested for countries with tropical climates or when long-term storage (more than one crop year) is a normal commercial practice. The values in the second column are suggested for more moderate climates or when other short-term storage is the normal commercial practice. Pulse Moisture content (percent) beans 15 19 lentils 15 16 peas 15 18 chick peas 14 16 cow peas 15 18 field beans 15 19 Lower moisture limits should be required for certain destinations in relation to the climate, duration of transport and storage. 3.2.1.2 In the case of pulses sold without their seed coat, the maximum moisture content shall be 2 percent (absolute) lower in each case. 3.2.2 Extraneous matter is mineral or organic matter (dust, twigs, seedcoats, seeds of other species, dead insects, fragments, or remains of insects, other impurities of animal origin). Pulses shall have not more than 1 percent extraneous matter of which not more than 0.25 percent shall be mineral matter and not more than 0.10 percent shall be dead insects, fragments or remains of insects, and/or other impurities of animal origin. -- 2 of 5 -- CXS 171-1989 3 3.2.2.1 Toxic or noxious seeds The products covered by the provisions of this standard shall be free from the following toxic or noxious seeds in amounts which may represent a hazard to human health. – Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp.), corn cockle (Agrostemma githago L.), castor bean (Ricinus communis L.), Jimson weed (Datura spp.), and other seeds that are commonly recognized as harmful to health. 4. CONTAMINANTS 4.1 Heavy metals Pulses shall be free from heavy metals in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. 4.2 Pesticide residues Pulses shall comply with those maximum residue limits established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) for this commodity. 4.3 Mycotoxins Pulses shall comply with those maximum mycotoxin limits established by the CAC for this commodity. 5. HYGIENE 5.1 It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),1 and other codes of practice recommended by the CAC which are relevant to these products. 5.2 To the extent possible in good manufacturing practice, the products shall be free from objectionable matter. 5.3 When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination, the products: – shall be free from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health; – shall be free from parasites which may represent a hazard to health; and – shall not contain any substance originating from microorganisms in amounts which may represent a hazard to health. 6. PACKAGING 6.1 Pulses shall be packaged in containers which will safeguard the hygienic, nutritional, technological, and organoleptic qualities of the product. 6.2 The containers, including packaging material, shall be made of substances which are safe and suitable for their intended use. They should not impart any toxic substance or undesirable odour or flavour to the product. 6.3 When the product is packaged in sacks, these must be clean, sturdy and strongly sewn or sealed. 7. LABELLING In addition to the requirements of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),2 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 Name of the product The name of the product to be shown on the label shall be the commercial type of the pulse. 7.2 Labelling of non-retail containers Information for non-retail containers shall either be given on the container or in accompanying documents, except that the name of the product, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer shall appear on the container. However, lot identification and the name and address of the manufacturer or packer may be replaced by an identification mark, provided that such a mark is clearly identifiable with the accompanying documents. 8. METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING For checking the compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)3 relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. -- 3 of 5 -- CXS 171-1989 4 ANNEX In those instances where more than one factor limit and/or method of analysis is given we strongly recommend that users specify the appropriate limit and method of analysis. Factor/Description Limit Method of analysis DEFECTS Visual examination  seeds with serious defects. Seeds in which the cotyledons have been affected or attacked by pests; seeds with very slight traces of mould or decay; or slight cotyledon staining Max: 1 %  seeds with slight defects. Seeds which have not reached normal development; seeds with extensive seedcoat staining, without the cotyledon being affected; seeds in which the seedcoat is wrinkled, with pronounced folding, or broken pulses Max: 7 % of which broken pulses must not exceed 3 %  broken pulses. Broken in whole pulses are pulses in which the cotyledons are separated, or one cotyledon has been broken. Broken in split pulses are pulses in which the cotyledon has been broken SEED DISCOLOURATION Visual examination  seeds of a similar colour but a different commercial type (except in beans with white seeds) Max: 3 %  seeds of different colour (other than discoloured seeds) Max: 6 %  discoloured seeds Max: 3 %  discoloured seeds of the same commercial type Max: 10 %  beans with green seed and peas with green seeds with slight discolouration of the seed Max: 20 % PRESENTATION Buyer preference Visual examination  shelled pulses. Pulses without their seedcoat, with the cotyledons not separated  split pulses. Pulses without their seedcoat, with the two cotyledons separated one from the other -- 4 of 5 -- CXS 171-1989 5 NOTES 1 FAO and WHO. 1969. General principles of food hygiene. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 1-1969. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 2 FAO and WHO. 1985. General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 1-1985. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 3 FAO and WHO. 1999. Recommended methods of analysis and sampling. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 234- 1999. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. -- 5 of 5 --