REGIONAL STANDARD FOR CULANTRO COYOTEi Latin America and the Caribbean CXS 304R-2011 Adopted in 2011. Amended in 2023. i International names for Eryngium foetidum L include: culantro, culantrón, culantro coyote, culantro extranjero, culantro real, alcapate, escorzonera, samat, xamat, cilantro cimarrón, recao, culantro culebra, cilantro ancho, jia yuan gian, koulant, chadwon, spiritweed, false coriander, long coriander, stinkweed, fitweed. -- 1 of 6 -- CXS 304R-2011 2 Amendments 2023 Following decisions taken at the Forty-sixth Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2023, amendments were made in Section 6.2 Labelling of non-retail containers and Section 7 Food additives was added. -- 2 of 6 -- CXS 304R-2011 3 1. DEFINITION OF PRODUCE This standard applies to commercial varieties and/or commercial types of culantro coyote grown from Eryngyum foetidum L., of the Apiaceae family, to be supplied in bundlesii of fresh leaves or any other equivalent presentation to the consumer, after preparation and packaging. Culantro coyote for industrial processing are excluded. 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY 2.1 Minimum requirements In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, bundles of culantro coyote must:  be sound, and free of leaves affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make them unfit for consumption;  be clean, and practically free of any visible foreign matter;  be practically free of pests, and damage caused by them, affecting the general appearance of the produce;  be free of any foreign smell and/or taste; and  be free of damage caused by low and/or high temperatures. In addition, they must have a fresh appearance and have their natural colouring. 2.1.1 The development and condition of culantro coyote must be such as to enable it:  to withstand transport and handling; and  to arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 2.2 Classification Culantro coyote is classified into the three classes defined below: 2.2.1 Extra class Bundles in this class must be of superior quality, and characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. They must be free of defects, with the exception of very slight superficial defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. 2.2.2 Class Iiii Bundles in this class must be of good quality, and characteristic of the variety and/or commercial type. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package:  presence of white, and/or brown and yellow blemishes, that do not exceed 5 percent of the total leaves in the bundle;  presence of broken leaves that do not exceed 10 percent of the total leaves in the bundle; and  presence of split leaves that do not exceed 10 percent of the total leaves in the bundle. 2.2.3 Class II This class includes bundles which do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes, but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 2.1 above. The following defects, however, may be allowed, provided the rambutans retain their essential characteristics as regards the quality, the keeping quality and presentation:  presence of white, and/or brown and yellow blemishes, that do not exceed 15 percent of the total leaves in the bundle;  presence of broken leaves that do not exceed 20 percent of the total leaves in the bundle; and  presence of split leaves that do not exceed 20 percent of the total leaves in the bundle. ii Bundle: number of leaves that can be held in the hand. iii Broken leaves: leaves whose central vein has suffered breakage from physical damage without losing any parts adjacent to the point of breakage. Split leaves: leaves in which part of the blade area is missing. -- 3 of 6 -- CXS 304R-2011 4 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Size is determined by the number of bundles per kilogram. The size specifications are as follows: Size specifications for bundles of leaves Size code Weight per bundle (grams) Number of bundles per kg 1 > 200 < 5 2 150–200 5–7 3 100–149 8–10 4 50–99 11–20 5 < 50 > 20 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES Tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each package for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 Quality tolerances 4.1.1 Extra class Five percent, by number or weight of bundles, not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of class I or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent, by number or weight of bundles, not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of class II or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.3 Class II Ten percent, by number or weight of bundles, satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements, with the exception of produce affected by rotting or any other deterioration rendering it unfit for consumption. 4.2 Size tolerances For all classes and forms of presentation, ten percent by number or weight of bundles corresponding to the size immediately above and/or below that indicated on the package. 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 Uniformity The contents of each package must be uniform and contain only bundles of the same origin, variety and/or commercial type, quality, size, and colour. The visible part of the contents of the package must be representative of the entire contents. 5.2 Packaging The bundles must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new,iv clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. The bundles shall be packed in each container in compliance with the recommended international Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 44-1995).1 5.2.1 Description of containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of culantro coyote. Packages must be free of all foreign matter and smell. iv For the purposes of this standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality. -- 4 of 6 -- CXS 304R-2011 5 5.3 Presentation The bundles may be presented in one of the following forms: 5.3.1 Individually In this case, each bundle will be packed in a separate bag. 5.3.2 In bunches In this case, several bundles will be placed in each bag, according to their size. 6. MARKING OR LABELLING 6.1 Consumer packages In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods (CXS 1- 1985),2 the following specific provisions apply: 6.1.1 Nature of produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the name of the produce “culantro coyote”, or its name in the country of marketing, and may be labelled as to the name of the variety and/or commercial type, specifying the form of presentation (individual or in bunches). 6.2 Labelling of non-retail containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Containers of Foods (CXS 346-2021).3 In addition, the following specific requirement shall apply: 6.2.1 Nature of produce Name of the produce “culantro coyote”, or its name in the country of marketing, if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety and/or commercial type (optional). 7. FOOD ADDITIVES No food additives are permitted in foods conforming to this standard. 8. CONTAMINANTS 8.1 The produce covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193-1995).4 8.2 The produce covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 9. HYGIENE 9.1 It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969),5 the Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 53-2003),6 and other relevant Codex texts such as codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. 9.2 The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods (CXG 21-1997).7 -- 5 of 6 -- CXS 304R-2011 6 NOTES 1 FAO and WHO. 1995. Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 44-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 2 FAO and WHO. 1985. General Standard for the Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 1-1985. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 3 FAO and WHO. 2021. General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Container of Foods. Standard, No. CXS 346- 2021. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 4 FAO and WHO. 1995. General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 193-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 5 FAO and WHO. 1969. General Principles of Food Hygiene. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 1-1969. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://doi.org/10.4060/cc6125en 6 FAO and WHO. 2003. Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 53-2003. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 7 FAO and WHO. 1997. Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods. Codex Alimentarius Guideline, No. CXG 21-1997. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. Members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in the Region of Latin America and the Caribbean are indicated on the Codex website at https://www.fao.org/fao-who-codexalimentarius -- 6 of 6 --