CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR QUICK-FROZEN RAW SQUID CXS 191-1995 CXS 191-1995 ADOPTED 1995 AMENDED 2024 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 8 -- History of the standard 2026 Corrigendum For consistency, the word analyses has been changed to analysis in Section 7: “Sampling, examination and analysis”. This publication was redesigned and published in 2026. 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in November 2024, amendments were made in Section 6.4” “Labelling of non-retail containers” by replacing the text with a reference to the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021); and Section 7: “Sampling, examination and analysis” was amended by replacing methods of analysis with a reference to the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). Adopted in 1995. -- 2 of 8 -- STANDARD FOR QUIC- FROZEN RAW SQUID (CXS 191-1995) 1 1 Scope This standard applies to quick-frozen raw squid and parts of raw squid, as defined below and offered for direct consumption without further processing. It does not apply to products indicated as intended for further processing or for other industrial purpose. 2 Description 2.1 Product definition Quick-frozen squid and parts of squid are obtained from squid species of the following families: • Loliginidae; and • Ommastrephidae. 2.2 Process definition The product after any suitable preparation shall be subjected to a freezing process and shall comply with the conditions laid down hereafter. The freezing process shall be carried out in appropriate equipment in such a way that the range of temperature of maximum crystallization is passed quickly. The quick-freezing process shall not be regarded as complete unless and until the product temperature has reached -18 °C or colder at the thermal centre after thermal stabilization. The product shall be kept deep frozen so as to maintain the quality during transportation, storage and distribution. Industrial repacking of intermediate quick-frozen material under controlled conditions which maintain the quality of the product, followed by the reapplication of the quick-freezing process as defined above, is permitted. Quick-frozen squid and parts of squid shall be processed and packaged so as to minimize dehydration and oxidation. 2.3 Presentation Any presentation of the product shall be permitted provided that it: • meets all the requirements of this standard; and • is adequately described on the label to avoid confusing or misleading the consumer. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 Squid Quick-frozen squid shall be prepared from sound squid which are of a quality fit to be sold fresh for human consumption. -- 3 of 8 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 3.2 Glazing If glazed, the water used for glazing or preparing glazing solutions shall be of potable quality or shall be clean seawater. Potable water is freshwater fit for human consumption. Standards of potability shall not be less than those contained in the latest edition of the World Health Organization’s Guidelines for drinking- water quality.1 Clean seawater is seawater which meets the same microbiological standards as potable water and is free from objectionable substances. 3.3 Final product Products shall meet the requirements of this standard when lots examined in accordance with Section 9: “Lot acceptance” comply with the provisions set out in Section 8: “Definition of defectives”. Products shall be examined by the methods given in Section 7: “Sampling, examination and analysis”. 4 Food additives No food additives are permitted in these products. 5 Hygiene and handling It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969),2 the Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52-2003),3 the Code of practice for the processing and handling of quick-frozen foods (CXC 8-1976),4 and other relevant Codex codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. The products should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997).5 The final product shall be free from any foreign material that poses a threat to human health. When tested by appropriate methods of sampling and examination prescribed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC), the product: • shall be free from microorganisms or substances originating from microorganisms in amounts which may present a hazard to health in accordance with standards established by the CAC; and • shall not contain any other substance in amounts which may present a hazard to health in accordance with standards established by the CAC. 6 Labelling In addition to the provisions of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),6 the following specific provisions apply: -- 4 of 8 -- STANDARD FOR QUIC- FROZEN RAW SQUID (CXS 191-1995) 3 6.1 Name of the food The name of the product shall be “squid”, or another name according to the law, custom or practice in the country in which the product is to be distributed. There shall appear on the label reference to the presentation, in close proximity to the name of the food in such additional words or phrases that will avoid misleading or confusing the consumer. In addition, the labelling shall show the term “frozen” or “quick-frozen”, whichever is customarily used in the country in which the product is distributed, to describe a product subjected to the freezing process described in Section 2.2: “Process definition”. The label shall state that the product should be maintained under conditions that will maintain the quality during transportation, storage and distribution. If the product has been glazed with seawater, a statement to this effect shall be made. 6.2 Net contents (glazed products) Where the food has been glazed, the declaration of net contents of the food shall be exclusive of the glaze. 6.3 Storage instructions The label shall include terms to indicate that the product shall be stored at a temperature of -18 °C or colder. 6.4 Labelling of non-retail containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021).7 7 Sampling, examination and analysis 7.1 Sampling Sampling of lots for examination of the product shall be in accordance with an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5. Sampling of lots composed of blocks shall be in accordance with the sampling plan developed for quick-frozen fish blocks (reference to be provided). The sample unit is the primary container or for individually quick-frozen products is at least 1 kg portion of the sample unit. Sampling of lots for examination of net weight shall be carried out in accordance with an appropriate sampling plan meeting the criteria established by the CAC. 7.2 Sensory and physical examination Samples taken for sensory and physical examination shall be assessed by persons trained in such examination and in accordance with procedures elaborated in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999)8 and the Guidelines for the sensory evaluation of fish and shellfish in laboratories (CXG 31-1999).9 7.3 Analysis For checking compliance with this standard, the methods of analysis and sampling contained in the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999) relevant to the provisions in this standard shall be used. -- 5 of 8 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 8 Definition of defectives The sample unit shall be considered defective when it exhibits any of the properties defined below. 8.1 Deep dehydration Greater than 10 percent of the surface area of the sample unit exhibits excessive loss of moisture clearly shown as white or yellow abnormality on the surface which masks the colour of the flesh and penetrates below the surface, and cannot be easily removed by scraping with a knife or other sharp instrument without unduly affecting the appearance of the squid. 8.2 Foreign matter The presence in the sample unit of any matter which has not been derived from squid (excluding packing material), does not pose a threat to human health, and is readily recognized without magnification or is present at a level determined by any method including magnification that indicates non-compliance with good manufacturing and sanitation practices. 8.3 Odour and flavour A sample unit affected by persistent and distinct objectional odours or flavours indicative of decomposition, which may be characterized also by light pinkish to red colour. 8.4 Texture Textural breakdown of the flesh, indicative of decomposition, characterized by muscle structure which is mushy or paste-like. 9 Lot acceptance A lot shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this standard when: • the total number of defectives as classified according to Section 8: “Definition of defectives” does not exceed the acceptance number (c) of an appropriate sampling plan with an AQL of 6.5; • the average net weight of all sample units is not less than the declared weight, provided there is no unreasonable shortage in any container; and • the food additives, hygiene and labelling requirements of Section 4: “Food additives”, Section 5: “Hygiene and handling” and Section 6: “Labelling” are met. -- 6 of 8 -- STANDARD FOR QUIC- FROZEN RAW SQUID (CXS 191-1995) 5 Referenced texts 1 WHO. 2022. Guidelines for drinking-water quality – fourth edition incorporating the first and second addenda. Geneva. Guidelines for drinking-water quality: fourth edition incorporating the first and second addenda 2 General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969). 33 Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52-2003). 44 Code of practice for the processing and handling of quick-frozen foods (CXC 8-1976). 55 Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria for foods (CXG 21-1997). 66 General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985). 77 General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021). 88 Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). 99 Guidelines for the sensory evaluation of fish and shellfish in laboratories (CXG 31-1999). -- 7 of 8 -- Codex Alimentarius A collection of international food standards developed to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. Codex standards are adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, an intergovernmental body with 189 Members, established by FAO and WHO. The standards are recognized by the World Trade Organization as the benchmark for the safety of internationally traded food. Codex Secretariat Contacts codex@fao.org codexalimentarius.org x.com/FAOWHOCodex youtube.com/@UNFAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, Italy © FAO and WHO, 2026 The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) or the World Health Organization (WHO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. FAO and WHO. 2026. Standard for quick-frozen raw squid. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 191-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. https://openknowledge.fao.org/handle/20.500.14283/ce0065en Some rights reserved. This work is made axvailable under the Creative Commons Attribution–NonCommercial 4.0 International licence (CC BY-NC 4.0) -- 8 of 8 --