CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S STANDARD FOR SMOKED FISH, SMOKE-FLAVOURED FISH AND SMOKE-DRIED FISH CXS 311-2013 CXS 311-2013 ADOPTED 2013 AMENDED 2024 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD I N T E R N A T I O N A L F O O D S T A N D A R D S -- 1 of 14 -- History of the standard This publication was redesigned and published in 2026. 2024 Amendments Following decisions taken at the Forty-seventh Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 2024, amendments were made in Section 7.4: “Labelling of non-retail containers” by replacing the text with a reference to the General standard for the labelling of non-retail containers of foods (CXS 346-2021); and Section 8: “Sampling, examination and analysis” was amended by replacing methods of analysis and numeric performance criteria with a reference to the Recommended methods of analysis and sampling (CXS 234-1999). Amendments made prior to 2024: Amended in 2016 and 2018. Adopted in 2013. -- 2 of 14 -- 1 STANDARD FOR SMOKED FISH, SMOKE FLAVOURED FISH AND SMOKE DRIED FISH (CXS 311-2013) 1 Scope This standard applies to smoked, smoke-flavoured and smoke-dried fish prepared from fresh, chilled or frozen raw material. It deals with whole fish, fillets and sliced and similar products thereof. The standard applies to fish, either for direct consumption, for further processing or for addition into speciality or minced products where fish constitutes only part of the edible contents. It does not apply to fish treated with carbon monoxide (filtered, “clear” or “tasteless” smoke), fish packaged in hermetically sealed containers processed to commercial sterility. Speciality or minced products as such are not included (e.g. fish salads). 2 Description Product and process definitions for smoked fish, smoke-flavoured fish and smoke-dried fish are considered separately under this section. 2.1 Smoked fish 2.1.1 Product definition Smoked fish is prepared from fish that has undergone a hot or cold smoking process. The smoke must be applied through one of the smoking processes defined in Section 2.1.2: “Process definitions” and the end product must have smoked sensory characteristics. Spices and other optional ingredients may be used. 2.1.2 Process definitions • Smoking is a process of treating fish by exposing it to smoke from smouldering wood or plant materials. This process is usually characterized by an integrated combination of salting, drying, heating and smoking steps in a smoking chamber. • Smoking by regenerated smoke is a process of treating fish by exposing it to smoke which is regenerated by atomizing smoke condensate in a smoking chamber under the time and temperature conditions similar to those for hot or cold smoking. • Smoke condensates are products obtained by controlled thermal degradation of wood in a limited supply of oxygen (pyrolysis), subsequent condensation of the resultant smoke vapours, and fractionation of the resulting liquid products. • Hot smoking is a process in which fish is smoked at an appropriate combination of temperature and time sufficient to cause the complete coagulation of the proteins in the fish flesh. Hot smoking is generally sufficient to kill parasites, to destroy non-sporulated bacterial pathogens and to injure spores of human health concern. • Cold smoking is a process of treating fish with smoke using a time/temperature combination that will not cause significant coagulation of the proteins in the fish flesh but that will cause some reduction of the water activity. • Salting is a process of treating fish with salt of food-grade quality to lower water activity in fish flesh and to enhance flavour by any appropriate salting technology (e.g. dry salting, brining, injection salting). • Drying is a process in which the moisture content in the fish is decreased to appropriate required characteristics under controlled hygienic conditions. -- 3 of 14 -- 2 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD • Packaging is a process in which smoked fish is put in a container, either aerobically or under reduced oxygen conditions, including under vacuum or in a modified atmosphere. • Storage is a process in which smoked fish is kept refrigerated or frozen to assure product quality and safety in conformity with Section 3: “Essential composition and quality factors” and Section 6: “Hygiene and handling”. 2.2 Smoke-flavoured fish 2.2.1 Product definition Smoke-flavoured fish is prepared from fish that has been treated with smoke flavours, without undergoing a smoking process as described in Section 2.1: “Smoked fish”. The end product must have a smoked taste. Spices and other optional ingredients may be used. 2.2.2 Process definition • Smoke flavours are either smoke condensates or artificial flavour blends prepared by mixing chemically defined substances in known amounts or any combination of both (smoke preparations). • Smoke flavouring is a process in which fish or fish preparations are treated with smoke flavour. The smoke flavour can be applied by any technology (e.g. dipping, spraying, injecting, soaking). • Smoke condensates are products obtained by controlled thermal degradation of wood in a limited supply of oxygen (pyrolysis), subsequent condensation of the resultant smoke vapours, and fractionation of the resulting liquid products. • Packaging is a process in which smoke-flavoured fish is put in a container, either aerobically or under reduced oxygen conditions, including under vacuum or in a modified atmosphere. • Storage is a process in which smoke-flavoured fish is kept refrigerated or frozen to assure product quality and safety in conformity with Section 3: “Essential composition and quality factors” and Section 6: “Hygiene and handling”. • Drying is a process in which the moisture content in the fish is decreased to appropriate required characteristics under controlled hygienic conditions. • Salting is a process of treating fish with salt of food-grade quality to lower water activity in fish flesh and to enhance flavour by any appropriate salting technology (e.g. dry salting, brining, injection salting). 2.3 Smoke-dried fish 2.3.1 Product definition Smoke-dried fish is prepared from fish that has undergone a combined smoking and drying process and may include a salting process. The smoke must be applied through a smoke-drying process traditional for the respective country or an industrial smoke-drying process and the end product must have smoke-dried sensory characteristics. Spices and other optional ingredients may be used. 2.3.2 Process definition • Smoke drying is a process in which fish is treated by combined smoking and drying steps to such an extent that the final product can be stored and transported without refrigeration and to achieve a water activity of 0.75 or less (10 percent moisture content or less), as necessary to control bacterial pathogens and fungal spoilage. • Drying is a process in which the moisture content in the fish is decreased to appropriate required characteristics under controlled hygienic conditions. -- 4 of 14 -- 3 STANDARD FOR SMOKED FISH, SMOKE FLAVOURED FISH AND SMOKE DRIED FISH (CXS 311-2013) • Salting is a process of treating fish with salt of food-grade quality to lower water activity in fish flesh and to enhance flavour by any appropriate salting technology (e.g. dry salting, brining, injection salting). • Packaging is a process in which smoke-dried fish is put in a container to avoid contamination and prevent rehydration. • Storage is a process in which smoke-dried fish is typically kept at ambient temperature in a way to assure its safety and quality in conformity with Section 3: “Essential composition and quality factors” and Section 6: “Hygiene and handling”. 2.4 Presentation Any presentation of the product shall be permitted provided that it meets all requirements of this standard, and it is adequately described on the label to avoid confusing or misleading the consumer. 3 Essential composition and quality factors 3.1 The raw material Smoked fish, smoke-flavoured fish and smoke-dried fish shall be prepared from sound and wholesome fish, which may be fresh, chilled or frozen and of a quality to be sold for human consumption after appropriate preparation. 3.2 Ingredients All ingredients used shall be of food-grade quality and conform to all applicable Codex standards. 3.3 Wood or other plant material for generation of smoke Wood or other plant material used for the generation of smoke or smoke condensates must not contain toxic substances either naturally or through contamination, or after having been treated with chemicals, paint or impregnating materials. In addition, wood or other plant material must be handled in a way to avoid contamination (refer to the Code of practice for the reduction of contamination of food with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) from smoking and direct drying processes (CXC 68-2009)).1 3.4 Decomposition The product of susceptible species shall not contain more than 10 mg of histamine per 100 g fish flesh based on the average of the sample unit tested and all products in this standard shall be free from persistent and objectionable odours and flavours characteristic of decomposition. 3.5 Final product Products shall meet the requirements of this standard when lots examined in accordance with Section 10: “Lot acceptance” comply with the provisions set out in Section 9: “Definition of defectives”. Products shall be examined by the methods given in Section 8: “Sampling, examination and analysis”. -- 5 of 14 -- 4 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 4 Food additives 4.1 Smoked fish Acidity regulators, colours and preservatives used in accordance with Table 1 and Table 2 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995)2 in food category 09.2.5 (Smoked, dried, fermented, and/or salted fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms) and its parent food categories and only certain acidity regulators, antioxidants and packaging gases as indicated in Table 3 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995) are acceptable for use in foods conforming to this standard. 4.2 Smoke-flavoured fish Acidity regulators, colours and preservatives used in accordance with Table 1 and Table 2 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995) in food category 09.2.5 (Smoked, dried, fermented, and/or salted fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms) and its parent food categories and only certain acidity regulators, antioxidants and packaging gases as indicated in Table 3 of the General standard for food additives (CXS 192-1995) are acceptable for use in foods conforming to this standard. 4.3 Smoke-dried fish No additives are permitted in smoke-dried fish. 5 Contaminants 5.1 General provisions The products covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General standard for contaminants and toxins in foods and feed (CXS 193-1995).3 5.2 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) Smoking of fish should be done in a manner that minimizes the formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). This can be achieved by following the Code of practice for the reduction of contamination of food with polycyclic hydrocarbons (PAH) from smoking and direct drying processes (CXC 68-2009). 6 Hygiene and handling 6.1 General provisions The products covered by the provisions of this standard shall be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General principles of food hygiene (CXC 1-1969)4 and other relevant Codex texts such as codes of practice and codes of hygienic practice, such as the Code of practice for fish and fishery products (CXC 52-2003).5 6.2 Microbiological criteria The products shall comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and guidelines for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria related to foods (CXG 21-1997).6 -- 6 of 14 -- 5 STANDARD FOR SMOKED FISH, SMOKE FLAVOURED FISH AND SMOKE DRIED FISH (CXS 311-2013) 6.3 Parasites Products covered by this standard shall not contain living parasites and particular attention needs to be paid to cold smoked or smoke-flavoured products, which should be frozen before or after smoking if a parasite hazard is present (see Annex I). Viability of nematodes, cestodes and trematodes shall be examined according to Section 8.2.2: “Determination of the viability of parasites” and/or Section 8.2.3: “Determination of visible parasites”. 6.4 Listeria monocytogenes The ready-to-eat products shall comply with microbiological criteria for Listeria monocytogenes in ready-to-eat foods which was elaborated in the Annex II of the Guidelines on the application of general principles of food hygiene to the control of Listeria monocytogenes in foods (CXG 61-2007).7 6.5 Clostridium botulinum Toxins of Clostridium botulinum are not allowed in smoked fish, smoke-flavoured fish and smoke-dried fish products. The formation of Clostridium botulinum toxin can be controlled through an application of a combination of science-based options such as packaging type, storage temperature and water activity, e.g. by use of salt in the water phase. Examples are shown in the table in Annex II, which addresses these control options. Countries, where the products are to be consumed, may allow these products in an uneviscerated state or may require evisceration, either before or after processing, in such a way as to minimize the risk of Clostridium botulinum. 6.6 Histamine The product shall not contain histamine that exceeds 20 mg/100 g fish flesh in any sample unit tested. This applies only to susceptible species (e.g. Scombridae, Clupeidae, Engraulidae, Coryphaenidae, Pomatomidae, Scomberesocidae). 6.7 Other substances The products shall not contain any other substance in amounts which may present a hazard to health in accordance with standards established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, and the final product shall be free from any foreign material that poses a threat to human health. 7 Labelling In addition to the provisions of the General standard for the labelling of pre-packaged foods (CXS 1-1985),8 the following specific provisions apply: 7.1 Name of the food The name of the food must be “smoked X” if treated by the processes described in Section 2.1: “Smoked fish”; “smoke-flavoured X” if treated by the processes described in Section 2.2: “Smoke-flavoured fish”; “smoke-dried X” if treated by the processes described in Section 2.3: “Smoke-dried fish” – X being the common or usual name of the species of fish used in accordance with the law or customs of the country in which the food is sold, so as not to mislead the consumer. 7.2 Additional labelling Countries, where the product is sold, can determine whether the use of regenerated smoke must be indicated on the label. -- 7 of 14 -- 6 CODEX ALIMENTARIUS STANDARD 7.3 Storage and handling instructions The label shall declare storage and h