STANDARD FOR DURIAN CODEX STAN 317-2014 -- 1 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 317-2014 2 1. DEFINITION OF PRODUCE This Standard applies to commercial varieties of durians grown from Durio spp., of the Bombacaceae family, to be supplied fresh to the consumer after preparation and packaging. Durians for industrial processing are excluded. 2. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY 2.1. Minimum Requirements In all classes, subject to the special provisions for each class and the tolerances allowed, the durians must be: - whole, with the peduncle intact, the peduncle may be trimmed; - sound, produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded; - clean and practically free of any visible foreign matter; - practically free of pests and damage caused by them affecting the general appearance of the produce; - free of abnormal external moisture, excluding condensation following removal from cold storage; - free of any foreign smell and/or taste1; - free of damage caused by low and/or high temperatures; - free of cracking. The durians must have reached an appropriate degree of development in accordance with criteria proper to the variety and to the area in which they are grown and to allow the fruit to reach an appropriate degree of ripeness. The development and condition of the durians must be such as to enable them: - to withstand transport and handling; and - to arrive in satisfactory condition at the place of destination. 2.2 Classification Durians are classified into three classes defined below: 2.2.1 “Extra” Class Durians in this class must be of superior quality. They must be characteristic of the variety. Each fruit should carry a minimum of 4 fertile locules2. Thorns should be well developed with no splitting of thorn end. They must be free of defects, with the exception of very slight defects, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 2.2.2 Class I Durians in this class must be of good quality. They must be characteristic of the variety. Thorns should be well developed with no splitting end. The following slight defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: - slight defects in shape and should carry a minimum of 3 fertile locules; - slight healed defects; the maximum total area should not exceed 10%. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 2.2.3 Class II This class includes durians which do not qualify for inclusion in the higher classes, but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 2.1 above with characteristics of the variety. The following defects, however, may be allowed, provided these do not affect the general appearance of the produce, the quality, the keeping quality and presentation in the package: 1 The pungent smell of the products is not considered foreign. 2 Fertile locule means the external appearance of durian locule is visibly fully filled throughout the length of the fruit. -- 2 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 317-2014 3 - defects in shape and should carry a minimum of 2 fertile locules; - healed defects; the maximum total area should not exceed 15%. The defects must not, in any case, affect the pulp of the fruit. 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING SIZING Durian may be sized by weight or count. (a) When sized by weight, size is determined in accordance with the following table: Size code Weight (kg) 1 > 4.0 2 > 3.0 – 4.0 3 > 2.0 – 3.0 4 > 1.0 – 2.0 5 0.5 - 1.0 (b) When sized by count, size is determined by the number of individual fruit per package. 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCES Tolerances in respect of quality and size shall be allowed in each lot for produce not satisfying the requirements of the class indicated. 4.1 Quality Tolerances 4.1.1 “Extra” Class Five percent by number or weight of durians not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class I or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent by number or weight of durians not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of Class II or, exceptionally, coming within the tolerances of that class. 4.1.3 Class II Ten percent by number or weight of durians satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements with the exception of produce affected by rotting or any other deterioration rendering it unfit for consumption. 4.2 Size Tolerances For all classes, 20% by number or weight of durians corresponding to the size immediately above and/or below that indicated on the package. 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 Uniformity The contents of each package must be uniform and contain only durians of the same variety and quality. The visible part of the contents of the package must be representative of the entire contents. 5.2 Packaging Durians must be packed in such a way as to protect the produce properly. The materials used inside the package must be new3, clean, and of a quality such as to avoid causing any external or internal damage to the produce. The use of materials, particularly of paper or stamps bearing trade specifications is allowed, provided the printing or labelling has been done with non-toxic ink or glue. Durians shall be packed in each container in compliance with the Code of Practice for Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 44-1995). 3 For the purposes of this Standard, this includes recycled material of food-grade quality. -- 3 of 4 -- CODEX STAN 317-2014 4 5.2.1 Description of Containers The containers shall meet the quality, hygiene, ventilation and resistance characteristics to ensure suitable handling, shipping and preserving of the durians. Packages must be free of all foreign matter and smell. 6. MARKING OR LABELLING 6.1 Consumer Packages In addition to the requirements of the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (CODEX STAN 1-1985), the following specific provisions apply: 6.1.1 Nature of Produce If the produce is not visible from the outside, each package shall be labelled as to the name of the produce and may be labelled as to name of the variety. 6.2 Non-retail Containers Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside, or in the documents accompanying the shipment. 6.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher. Identification code (optional)4. 6.2.2 Nature of Produce Name of the produce if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety (optional). 6.2.3 Origin of Produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional or local place name. 6.2.4 Commercial Identification - Class; - Size (size code or weight range or count); - Net weight (optional). 6.2.5 Official Inspection Mark (optional) 7. CONTAMINANTS The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CODEX STAN 193-1995). The produce covered by this Standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 8. HYGIENE It is recommended that the produce covered by the provisions of this Standard be prepared and handled in accordance with the appropriate sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CAC/RCP 1-1969), Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CAC/RCP 53-2003), and other relevant Codex texts such as codes of hygienic practice and codes of practice. The produce should comply with any microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria related to Foods (CAC/GL 21-1997). 4 The national legislation of a number of countries requires the explicit declaration of the name and address. However, in the case where a code mark is used, the reference “packer and/or dispatcher (or equivalent abbreviations)” has to be indicated in close connection with the code mark. -- 4 of 4 --