REGIONAL STANDARD FOR FRESH LEAVES OF GNETUM spp. (Africa)1 CXS 335R-2020 Adopted in 2020. Amended in 2022. 2022 Amendments The following amendments were made to the text of the standard following decisions taken at the forty-fifth session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in December 2022. Page Location Original text Printed text 3 Section 6.2 Non-retail containers Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside or in the document accompanying the shipment. The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General Standard for the Labelling of Non- Retail Containers of Foods (CXS 346-2021). In addition the following specific requirements shall apply: Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside or in the document accompanying the shipment. 3 Section 6.2 Non-retail containers 6.2.1 Identification Name and address of exporter, packer and/or dispatcher identification code (optional) 6.2.2 Nature of produce The name of the produce (Gnetum leaves spp.), if the contents are not visible from the outside. Name of the variety and or commercial type (optional) 6.2.3 Origin of produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where gown or national, regional, or local place name 6.2.1 Origin of produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional, or local place name. 1 Members of the Codex Alimentarius Commission in the region of Africa are indicated on the Codex website at https://www.fao.org/fao-who-codexalimentarius. -- 1 of 4 -- CXS 335R-2020 2 1. SCOPE This standard applies to fresh whole and sliced leaves of Gnetum spp., namely commonly Gnetum africanum and Gnetum bucholzianum. 2. DESCRIPTION The Gnetum plant is a wild vine that is perennial and grows approximately 10 m long with the leaves growing approximately 8 cm long, often found in the rainforests. The most common species found in Africa: Gnetum africanum and Gnetum bucholzianum are morphologically similar but have slight differences in leaf shape. 3. PROVISIONS CONCERNING QUALITY 3.1 Minimum requirements 3.1.1 In all varieties, subject to the special provisions for each variety and tolerances allowed, the leaf shall be:  whole;  sound; produce affected by rotting or deterioration such as to make it unfit for consumption is excluded;  clean; practically free of any visible foreign matter;  practically free of pest affecting the general appearance of the produce;  free of abnormal external moisture excluding condensation following removal from cold storage;  fresh appearance, with a minimum water content of 60 percent;  practically free of damage caused by pests; and  free of any foreign smell and/or taste. 3.1.2 The Gnetum spp. leaves must be carefully picked and have reached a sufficient level of maturity. 3.2 Classification Gnetum spp. leaves are classified in the classes defined below: 3.2.1 Extra class The leaves or sliced leaves in this class shall be of one type, of superior quality, well developed and of characteristic colour for the type. At least 95 percent of the leaves, on weight basis, conform well to these requirements. 3.2.2 Class I The Gnetum spp. leaves in this class shall consist of leaves that meet the requirements of the extra class, except a small amount of young leaves of not more than 10 percent of the total amount of leaves, on the weight basis is acceptable. 3.2.3 Class II Gnetum spp. leaves in this class shall consist of leaves, which do not qualify for inclusion in the previous two categories, but satisfy the minimum requirements specified in Section 3.1. Nearly 20 percent of the leaves, on the weight basis, may differ from the maturity and colour requirements, without prejudice to minimum quality requirements. 4. PROVISIONS CONCERNING TOLERANCE 4.1 Quality tolerances 4.1.1 Extra class: Five percent of the weight basis of Gnetum spp. leaves not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of class I. 4.1.2 Class I Ten percent of the weight basis of Gnetum spp. leaves not satisfying the requirements of the class, but meeting those of class II. 4.1.3 Class II Twenty percent of the weight basis of Gnetum spp. leaves satisfying neither the requirements of the class nor the minimum requirements, excluding produce affected by rotting or any other deterioration, rendering it unfit for consumption. -- 2 of 4 -- CXS 335R-2020 3 5. PROVISIONS CONCERNING PRESENTATION 5.1 Packaging The leaves of Gnetum spp. leaves wrapped in boots (1 kg) or chopped must be packed in solid and sturdy containers which will safeguard the hygienic, nutritional, technological, and organoleptic qualities of the product without being able to impart any toxic substance or any odour or undesirable flavour. The Gnetum spp. leaves must be packaged and transported in accordance with the Code of Practice for the Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruit and Vegetables (CXC 44-1995).1 5.2 Uniformity The contents of each package (sales unit) must be uniform and contain only the leaves of the same quality, in conformity with classification requirements. 6. LABELLING In addition to the provisions of the General Standard for Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods (CXS 1-1985),2 the specific provisions below apply. 6.1 Name of the produce The name of the product covered by this standard is “Gnetum spp. leaves” followed by the local name as applicable.2 6.2 Non-retail containers The labelling of non-retail containers should be in accordance with the General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Containers of Foods (CXS 346-2021).3 In addition the following specific requirements shall apply: Each package must bear the following particulars, in letters grouped on the same side, legibly and indelibly marked, and visible from the outside or in the document accompanying the shipment. 6.2.1 Origin of produce Country of origin and, optionally, district where grown or national, regional, or local place name. 7. CONTAMINANTS The products covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum levels of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed (CXS 193-1995).4 The products covered by this standard shall comply with the maximum residue limits for pesticides established by the Codex Alimentarius Commission. 8. HYGIENE It is recommended that the products covered by the provisions of this standard be prepared and handled in accordance with applicable sections of the General Principles of Food Hygiene (CXC 1-1969),5 the Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (CXC 53-2003)6 and other relevant Codex Alimentarius documents. The product must meet the microbiological criteria established in accordance with the Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods (CXG 21-1997).7 2 Examples of local names: Okok and Eru (Cameroon), Okazi and Afang (Nigeria), Fumbua (Democratic Republic of Congo). -- 3 of 4 -- CXS 335R-2020 4 NOTES 1 FAO and WHO. 1995. Code of Practice for the Packaging and Transport of Fresh Fruit and Vegetables. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 44-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 2 FAO and WHO. 1985. General Standard for Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 1- 1985. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 3 FAO and WHO. 2021. General Standard for the Labelling of Non-Retail Container of Foods. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 346-2021. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 4 FAO and WHO. 1995. General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food and Feed. Codex Alimentarius Standard, No. CXS 193-1995. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 5 FAO and WHO. 1969. General Principles of Food Hygiene. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 1-1969. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 6 FAO and WHO. 2003. Code of Hygienic Practice for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Codex Alimentarius Code of Practice, No. CXC 53-2003. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. 7 FAO and WHO. 1997. Principles and Guidelines for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria Related to Foods. Codex Alimentarius Guideline, No. CXG 21-1997. Codex Alimentarius Commission. Rome. -- 4 of 4 --